PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
Agricultural Polytechnic
Horticultural Crops and Their Management
Course No. DA-282 (3+1)
(Theory Study Material)
Dr. K. SWATHI
Asst. Professor (Horti.),
Agricultural Polytechnic, Jagtial,
G. SWATHI
Asst. Professor (Horti.),
Agricultural Polytechnic, Kampasagar,
K. SARITHA
Asst. Professor (Horti.),
Agricultural Polytechnic, Palem
&
Dr. K. SUKUMAR
Vice - Principal
Agricultural Polytechnic, Jagtial
THEORY LECTURES
Lecture Lecture Name
No.
1. Fruits- Importance of fruits cultivation- Nutritional values- Importance of fruits in
nutritional security and development of national economy
2. Layout of Orchard- Steps in establishment of an Orchard - Points to be considered while
planning the orchard – planting systems- Square system- Rectangular system- Hexagonal
system - Quincunx system - Contour system
3 Criteria for selection of grafted plants - Precautions to take while planting the grafted plants
4 Soils- Physical, chemical properties- Soil water - Types of soils
5 Plant Propagation: Sexual propagation- Seed dormancy- Methods to overcome seed
dormancy
6 Asexual propagation – selection of stock and scion – preparation of scion branch – grafting
methods – graft incompatibility – characteristics – budding – management of nursery beds
7 Growing media for raising nursery plants – plant hormones – uses
8 Training - Methods of Training- Pruning -Methods of Pruning
9 Fruit drop- Reasons -Control measures -Fruit harvesting -Determination of maturity –
Equipment for harvesting -Grading-Packing-Storage and Transport
10 Production technology of Mango – Varieties – Propagation – Manures and fertilizers –
Intercultivation– Training and pruning - Harvesting – Yield – practices to be taken to get
fruit production every year
11 Production technology of Banana - Management practices
12 Production technology of Grape – Management practices
13 Production technology of Citrus – Species and varieties of citrus – Management practices
14 Production technology of Pomegranate and Papaya – Management Practices
15 Production technology of Guava and Cashew nut
16 Cultivation of Coconut – intercrops in coconut
17 Importance of vegetable cultivation – nutritional values, importance of vegetables in
human nutrition
18 Vegetable gardens – kitchen gardens – vegetables gardens according to purpose/ situations
19 Classification of vegetables based on botany, plant part used as vegetables, seasons of
growing and methods of culture - based on salt tolerance
20 Vegetable nurseries- seed treatment –management of raised nursery beds
Cultivation of important vegetables - Tomato- varieties- soil –climate- Tomato
21
22 Tomato - manures and fertilizers- water management –inter cultivation – harvest – yield
23 Cultivation practices of Brinjal
24 Cultivation practices of Bhendi
25 Beans – Cultivation practices
26 French Bean and Cowpea – cultivation practices
27 Chilli and Capsicum – cultivation practices
28 Cultivation of Cucubitaceous vegetables – characteristics – varieties – growing cucurbits
on pandal system
29 Cultivation of Cucubitaceous vegetables –Cucumber, Pumpkin and squash
30 Cultivation of Cabbage, Cauliflower – Physiological disorders- management
31 Cultivation of Carrot – Management practices
32 Cultivation of Onion – Management practices
33 Cultivation of Colacasia and Elephant foot yam
34 Importance of flower cultivation – garden features – Fence – Paths- Lawns – Flowering
plants -annuals- shrubs -trees
35 Ornamental gardens – formal gardens – informal gardens - features
36 Cultivation of important Flower crops – Rose – Management Practices – pruning – Pest
and diseases- Rose based by products
37 Jasmine - Species – Management practices
38 Chrysanthemum – varieties – Management practices
39 Cultivation of Marigold and Crossandra – Management practices
40 Greenhouse cultivation of flowers - techniques
41 Importance of preservation of fruits and vegetables- important considerations
42 Role of microbes in spoilage of stored food products – other reasons for spoilage
43 Preservation of fruits at family level – Zero Energy Cool Chamber
44 Cottage industry of fruits– techniques
45 Preparation Fruit Juice, Squash – Preservatives used for storage
46 Preparation of Jam and Jelly
47 Preparation of Sauce and Ketchup
48 Dehydrated Foods
Horticultural Crops and their management
Horticulture can be defined as the branch of Agriculture concerned with intensive
cultivation of fruits, vegetables, ornamental plants, spices and plantation crops, medicinal and
aromatic plants.
The word Horticulure is derived from the two latin words ‘Hortus’ meaning garden
and colere meaning ‘cultivation’.
Branches of Horticulture: The science of horticulture can be divided into several branches
depending upon the crops it deals with. The following are the branches of horticulture.
Pomology:Pomology is study or cultivation of fruit crops.
Eg. Mango, Sapota, Guava, Grape, Banana, etc.
Olericulture:Olericulture is the science of cultivation of vegetables crops.
Eg. Brinjal, Okra, Tomato, Pumpkin, etc.
Floriculture: Floriculture is the science of flower production.
Plantation crops: Plantation is the extensively cultivation of perennial trees. It includes
commercial crops like Coconut, Arecanut, Cashewnut, Tea, Coffee, Rubber, etc.
Spices – Spices are natural plant product used to improve the flavor, aroma, taste and colour
of food product.
Eg: Pepper, Cardamom, Clove, Nutmeg
Condiments – Plants used to add taste only (coriander, cumin)
Medicinal plants –Plants which are rich in secondary metabolites and are potential source
for drugs.
Eg. Senna, periwinkle, Aswagandha, etc.
Aromatic plants- are those plants which contains essential oils in them. The essential oils are
odoriferous steam volatile constituents of aromatic plants.
Eg. Lemon grass, Citronella, Palmrosa, Vetiver, Geranium, Davanam, etc.
Arboriculture: This branch deals with the raising of perennial trees meant for shade, avenue
or ornamental purposes.
Eg.Polyalthia, Spathodea, Cassia, Gulmohar,etc
Fruit preservation:It deals with the processing and preservation of produce of horticulture
crops.
Landscape gardening: It is the art of beautifying a piece of land like gardens, parks, etc. by
using garden design, methods and plant materials.
Nursery and seed production:It deals with the production of seeds and planting material of
horticulture crops on commercial basis.
Role of horticultural crops in human nutrition:
Horticultural crops contain more nutrients
1.Carbohydrates: It supplies energy
Eg: Fruits-raisins, dry apricot, dry karonda.
Vegetables-tapioca, sweet potato, potato.
2.Protein: These are body building foods. These are essential for growth of the body.
Eg: Fruits - cashew nut, almond.
Vegetables - lima bean, peas and cowpea
3.Fats: It supplies energy
Eg: Fruits - walnut, almond. vegetables- potato.
4.Minerals: Human body requires minerals like P, Ca, Iron, and Iodine, etc. for maintaining
good health.
5.Calcium: It is essential for healthy teeth and bones.
Eg: Litchi, Karonda and Agathi
6.Iron:It is required for production of haemoglobin. Its deficiency causes anaemia.
Eg: Fruits- Dry karonda, Dates. Vegetables - Amaranthus
7.Vitamins
Vitamin A: Essential for eye sight, growth and reproduction. Itsdeficiency causes night
blindness, roughness in skin.
Eg: Fruits- Mango, Papaya, Dates, and Jackfruit. Vegetables-Greens like Palak, Spinach,
Amaranthus, Fenugreek, Carrot, Cabbage, Lettuce, Peas and Tomato,etc.
Vitamin B:Necessary for normal functioning of nervous system. Its deficiency causes
beriberi.
Eg: Fruits - Cashew nut, Walnut. Vegetables-Chilli.
Vitamin -C (Ascorbic Acid): It improves immunity system and heals the wounds. Its
deficiency leads to scurvy disease.
Eg: Fruits- Amla, guava, ber, citrus, strawberry, pineapple etc. Vegetables- Tomato, palak,
menthi, cabbage,green chillies, spinach, potatoes, peas, beans and carrot,etc.
Vitamin-D: This vitamin is necessary for building up of bones. Its deficiency symptoms are
rickets and diseases of teeth.
Sources: All green leafy vegetables.
Benefits of cultivation of Horticulture crops:
• Provides employment opportunities
• Improvement in economic status of farmers
• Fruits and vegetables supply more nutrients
• Horticultural crops play an important role in commerce, particularly in export trade
and processing industry.
Differences between Horticultural Crops and Agricultural crops
Horticultural crops Agricultural crops
1. These crops are Annual and perennials 1. These crops are Annual in nature
2. Intensive cultivation 2. Extensive cultivation
3. Cultural operations like propagation, 3. Skill is not required
training, pruning and harvesting are
skilled and specific to horticultural crops.
4. Horticultural produces are highly 4. Agricultural Produces are not perishable
perishable, hence mostly utilized in the
fresh state.
5. High density planting is practiced 5. Not practiced
6. These plants can be grown for their 6. Not practiced
beauty or ornamental nature.
Lecture – 1
Importance of fruits cultivation- Nutritional values- Importance of fruit
cultivation in nutritional security anddevelopment
of national economy
Study of fruit crops cultivation is known as Pomology. Pomology is derived from
Greek word, Pomum. Pomum means fruits and logus means to study.
The Fruits are considered as the protective foods because it gives protection to human
body as it contains vitamins, proteins and minerals.
Fruits and vegetables supply several vitamins and Minerals
Vitamin A: Mango, Papaya,
Vitamin B: Cashewnut,Walnut, Apple, Banana
Vitamin C: Aonla, Guava, Citrus
Proteins: Aonla, Guava, Banana
Fe and Ca: Litchi, Dates, Amaranthus, Fig, etc.
Importace of fruits in human nutrition:
• It contains easily digestible sugars, so it supplies energy to human body
Eg: Mango contains 16- 17 % dextrose sugars
• Fruits contains fibres and cellulose, which helps in easy digestion
Eg: Papaya contains pectin
• Economically fruit crops are more profitable to farmers than agricultural crops. Fruit
crops have more productivity per hectare and give high yields.
• Fruit crops play important role in national economy development
Eg: export of cashew nut, coffee, tea
• Fruits contain phytochemicals which acts as antioxidant and gives protection from
different diseases.
Eg: Banana reduces diarrhoea
Aonla is used as medicine in Ayurveda
Importance of fruit crops in the national economy
India ranks second in fruits and vegetables production in the world, after China.India
produced 99.07 million MT of fruits and the area under cultivation of fruits is 6.66 million
ha(National Horticulture Board, 2019-20).India accounts for about 10.9 % of the world’s fruit
production.But 30-40% of the produce is lost before it reaches the consumer due to improper
post harvest management. There are many vegetarians in our country but the production is
very low. Hence, there is a huge demand for fresh fruits and fruit products, because fruits are
an excellent source of nutrients. In addition, fruit trees cover the ground as a plantation and
help maintain ecological balance.
Though Indian climatic conditions and soils are favourable for year round
cultivation of fruits, our country’s share in the global export market is 1% only. There are
various reasons for this
Reasons for less fruit yield in India:
• Fruits are highly perishable.
• Fruit crops cultivation is not so developed in the country.
• Lack of awareness on fruit crops production.
• Lack of transport facilities.
• Absence of organized marketing system.
• Lack of industrial development.
• Lack of technology in usage of Horticultural produce.
Lecture No. 2
Layout of Orchard- Selection of site and steps in establishment of an
Orchard
Selection of site
The following factors are to be considered before selecting a site to get expected
yields from the orchards.
1. Climate: The climate of the locality should be suited to the fruits or the fruit chosen should
be suited to the climate. Information to be collected on the seasons of heavy rainfall, hail
storms and hot winds in selected site.
2.Site: Sites should be examined for both physical andchemical properties of soils. Soil
samples must be analyzed to know the suitability of soil for growing fruit crops. Soil analysis
gives information on the type of soil, its fertility, its pH value, etc.There should be no hard
pan up to a depth of 2m.
3. Irrigation facilities: Most of the horticulture crops are raised under irrigation. So the
water facilities should also be taken in to consideration (quantity and quality).Water table
should be below 2 m depth.
4. Nearness to the market:The land chosen for orchard should be in proximity to market. It
saves the over head charges in transport. In most cases a large percentage of the retail
price of fruits is accounted for by transport charges.
5. Transport facilities: Fruits being perishable cannot be moved for long distances without
quick and refrigerated transport. The orchards must be located where there is quick
transport, preferably a refrigerated transport system.
6. Power (electricity) supply: It would be a great advantage if electric power lines are
running in the proximity of the area as it can be tapped easily.
7. Proximity to established orchards: It is an added advantage if the site is in
proximity to the already established orchards because of compactness of areas of
production facilitates provision of transport and storage facilities. It also enables
formation of co-operative societies and other associations which can collectively own
grading and spraying machinery and other costly equipment including storage facilities.
8. Availability of labour: The site should be such that labour may be cheap, skilled and in
plenty.
9. Presence of nurseries close by: It is an advantage if the nurseries are close by to the
selected site for selecting the plants for the orchard. It will also help to get cheap and quick
transport of plants which will ensure better establishment.
10. Cost of the land: Land should be available at low cost. If the above facilities are
available then the cost matter should be compromised
Points to be considered while planning the orchard
A careful plan of the orchard is necessary for the most efficient and economic
management. The following points should be borne in mind in preparing the plan.
• Fruit species suitable for the soil should be selected.
• Optimum spacing should be followed to accommodate maximum number of trees per
unit area.
• Stores and office building in the orchard should be constructed at the centre for proper
supervision
• Each kind of fruit should be assigned in a separate block. Fruits ripening at the same time
should be grouped together.
• Irrigation channels should be laid along the gradients for most economical conduct of
water.
• Wind breaks, rows of tall trees planted close together around the orchard are essential to
resist velocity of wind which causes severe ill-effects particularly moisture evaporation
from the soil.
• Roads should occupy minimum space for the economy of transport. The clearance
between wind break and first row of trees is advantageous for the road.
• A good fence is essential. Live fencing is economic and cheap to other kind of fences.
Eg: Agave, Prosopis juliflora, Pithecolobium dulce and Thevetia
• After deciding the method of planting in the orchard, required number of plants should
be purchased from the nursery wellin advance.
Points to be observed carefully before planting
• Before planting the fruit plants, its plan should be prepared in detail on paper. The
location of ridges, paths, drainage and sewage channel should be decided according the
slope of land and included in the plan
• Trees are felled without leaving stumps or roots. The shrubs and other weedy growth are
also cleared. Deep ploughing is essential to remove big roots. The lands should be
thoroughly ploughed, levelled and manured. Leveling is important for economy of
irrigation and preventing soil wash.
• Fencing is necessary to protect trees from stray cattle, human trespassing and also for
attractiveness. fencemaybe of stone, barbedwireor live fence. Live fence needs periodical
pruning or trimming to shape. Agave, Prosopis juliflora, Pithecolobium
dulce and Thevetia would serve as a good live fencing. There should a gap of 15 ft
between the row of live fencing plants and the first orchard row.
• Two rows of the Windbreaks are planted in the orchard. Windbreaks are planted
normally in north- west side of the orchard. These sides are sensitive for cold and hot
wind waves respectively. There should a gap of 30-40 ft between the row of wind break
and the first orchard row.
Lecture No.3
Planting systems- Different methods of Planting
The arrangement of plants in the orchard is known as lay-out. The orchard is laid out
as per following systems of planting
1. Square system:
• It is the most easy and popular method of planting fruit crops.
• In this system, plant to plant and row to row distances are kept similar.
• The plants are planted exactly at the right angle to each corner. Thus, every four
plants make one square.
• This system facilitates the intercultural in both directions as the distance between trees
and rows are similar.
• Adequate space is there to go for inter-cultivation of remunerative crops like
vegetables.
Square system
2. Rectangular system:
• The field is laid out into rectangular shape plot keeping more space between row and
row.
• Plant toplant distance is kept comparatively less. Thus, rectangular system
accommodates more plants in rows.
• Intercultural operations can be carried out through both ways.
• The plants get proper space and sunlight for their growth and development.
Rectangular system
3. Hexagonal system:
• In this method, the trees are planted in each comer of an equilateral triangle.
• This way six trees form a hexagon with the seventh tree in the centre. Therefore, this
system is also called as 'septule' as a seventh tree is accommodated in the centre of
hexagon.
• This system accommodates 15% more plants than square system.
• This system differs from the square system in which the distance between the
rows is less than the distance between the trees in a row, but the distance from tree to
tree in six directions remains the same.
• This system is usually employed, where land is expensive and is very fertile with
good availability of water.
Hexagonal system
4. Quincunx system:
• This is also known as filler or diagonal system.
• This is the modification of a square system of layout distinguished to make
use of the empty space in the center of each square by planting another plant
is called filler tree.
• Generally, the filler tree will be precocious and shorter duration and not be of
same kind as those planted on the corner of the square. Guava, phalsa, plum,
papaya, peaches, kinnow are important fillers.
• They yield some crop before the permanent trees come into bearing.
• The filler tree is removed when the main fruit trees grow to full stature and start
bearing.
• This system is followed when the distance between permanent trees exceeds
8m or more or where permanent trees are very slow in their growth and also take
longer time for coming to bearing. Eg. Sapota, Jackfruit.
• The plant population in this system is double than the square system.
Quincunx system
5. Contour system:
• It is generally followed on the hills where the plants are planted along the contour
across the slope.
• It particularly suits to land with undulated topography, where there is greater
danger of erosion and irrigation of the orchard is difficult.
• The main purpose of this system is to minimize soil erosion and to conserve soil
moisture so as to make the slope fit for growing fruits and plantation crops.
• The contour line is so designed and graded in such a way that the flow of water in the
irrigation channel becomes slow and thus finds time to penetrate into the soil without
causing erosion.
• The width of the contour terrace varies according to the nature of the slope. If the
slope becomes stiff, the width of terrace is narrower and vice-versa.
Contour system
6. Paired row system:
• In the paired row system, two plant rows are brought together followed by a wide gap
before the next set of two rows.
• The paired rows may be at 60 cm with 120 cm gap.
Eg: Mango
Paired row system
Lecture 3
Criteria for selection of grafted plants
• The plant should be upright without leaning
• Healthy and vigorous plants should be selected
• There should be at least 15 cm gap between the branches of the plant
• The plants should be uniform in growth and is determined by uniform length of
internodes.
• For immediate planting, plants in active growth should not be selected because they
may wilt during transit and die on planting.
• If plants are collected from the nursery bed, then the plants are lifted carefully along with
a ball of earth attached to the root system.
• The roots are wrapped in straw or grass or covered with a gunny cloth and placed in a
basket or a wooden crate for transport.
• Plants should be free from pests and diseases.
Precautions to take while planting the grafted plants:
Digging of pits:Generally the pits are dug 2 to 3 months in advance of planting i.e. March to
May. Pits of 1 m3 are dug and allow the pits to weather. All pits are dug similarly so that
plant position is not altered at planting time. While digging, the top soil should be kept on
one side and the bottom soil on another side separately as the topsoil is fertile than the bottom
soil
Filling of pits: Filling is done a fortnight or two after digging pits. The pits are filled with a
mixture of Top soil, FYM, leaf mould and bone meal. Pits are filled a few inches above the
ground level for shrinkage and settlement.
Planting method:
• In general planting is done during the monsoon in moderate rainfall areas and at the close
of the monsoon in heavy rainfall areas.
• The planting board should be used at the time of setting the plants, so that they are in a
perfect line.
• Planting should be done on cloudy days and preferably in the evening
• The plants should be set in such a way that the bud union remains slightly above the
ground level. The bud/ graft joint should not be covered with soil.
• After planting, the soil taken out from pit is pressed firmly to set the plant firmly in the
field.
• Plants should be irrigated soon after planting to drive away the air around the roots
completely
• The plants should be staked with a straight bamboo piece or other twig.
• Any buds on the rootstocks should be rubbed off. Due to transplanting shock some plants
may die in first 2-3 months after transplanting Hence, extra 10% plants should be
maintained for gap filling.
Lecture No.4
Soils- Physical, chemical properties- Soil water - Types of soils
Plant growth is good only when the soil contains suitable ratio of solid, liquid and
gaseous substances.
I. Soil physical properties:
1. Soil depth:Depth of soil profile from the top to parent material or bedrock or to the layer
of obstacles for roots. Physical and chemical barriers and high water tables can restrict
rooting depth which can affect plant growth. For example hard pans or gravel layers. It
differs significantly for different soil types. To grow mango, sapota, sweet orange, coconut,
jackfruit, etc. Soils with at least 2-2.5 m depth are required.
2. Mineral particles in the soil:The plant support, root penetration, drainage, aeration,
retention of moisture and plant nutrients is linked with the physical condition of the soil. The
physical properties of a soil depend on mineral composition of its particles, organic matter
content.
Soil texture refers to the relative distribution of the different sized particles in the soil.
Soil structure refers to the arrangement of soil particles into aggregates (or peds) and the
distribution of pores in between.
Clayey soils are exceedingly sticky when moist and when dry, become very hard and
difficult to break. They have fine pores and are poor in drainage and aeration. They have high
water holding capacity and poor percolation which usually results in water logging. Coarse-
textured sandy soils generally have high infiltration rates but poor water holding capacity.
Organic matter should be added to these soils.
3. Soil water table:
Water table, upper level of an underground surface in which the soil or rocks are
permanently saturated with water. The water table separates the ground water zone that lies
below it from the capillary fringe, or zone of aeration, that lies above it. The water table
fluctuates both with the seasons and from year to year because it is affected by climatic
variations and by the amount of precipitation used by vegetation. It also is affected by
withdrawing excessive amounts of water from wells or by recharging them artificially.
II. Soil chemical properties: Soil pH is one of the most important characteristics of soil
fertility because it has a direct impact on nutrient availability and plant growth. It is a
measure of the pH of the soil solution, which is considered the active pH that affects plant
growth.
The total range of the pH scale is from 0 to 14. Values below the mid-point (pH 7.0)
are acidic and those above pH 7.0 are alkaline. A soil pH of 7.0 is considered to be neutral.
Most plants perform best in a soil that is slightly acid to neutral (pH 6.0 to 7.0).
Types of soils
Alluvial Soils: These are mainly transported soils, carried away and deposited by the rivers
occurring in low lying areas. The nutrient status of these soils varies based upon the nature of
the parent material from which it has been transported in a particular location. These soils are
generally rich in fertility and low to medium in organic matter content.
Eg: Krishna, Godavari delta. Fruit crops suitable for these soils: Mango, Coconut,
Sapota, Jackfruit, etc.
Black Soils: Black soils are fine grained containing high water holding capacity but suffer
from poor drainage and consequent on drying. Thus swelling and shrinkage with increase or
decrease in moisture content is characteristic of black soils. Black soils are distinguished into
shallow (30 cm or less) medium (30-100 cm) and deep (over 100 cm). These soils are not
suitable to grow fruit crops
Red Soils: These are red in colour due to the presence of iron oxide. The colour varies from
red to black with intermediate shade of dark brown. Red soils are mostly sandy loam or sandy
clay in texture. They are deficient in nitrogen, phosphorous, lime and organic matter. These
soils are neutral to light acidic in nature.
Laterite Soils: These are formed as a result of decay of many types of rocks. They are red in
colour. They are deficient in nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and lime. Suitable crops are
Coffee, Tea, Potato, Fruits, etc. They are poor in production.
Forest and Hill Soils: The soils, typical of forests and mountains, occur along the slopes or
in depressions and valleys in forested areas. They are very shallow, steep and stony. They
show high content of organic matter and nitrogen. These soils are deposited as a result of
their movement through water erosion of the Himalayan ranges. They lie at the foot of the
Himalayan range. They are deep and moderately fertile soils but become highly productive
with the provision of drainage.
Desert Soils: These are sandy soils occurring in low rainfall areas of Gujarat, Rajasthan and
parts of Punjab. They are abundant in soluble salts but low in organic matter. Irrigation and
fertilizers should be given frequently.
Lecture No. 5
Plant Propagation: sexual propagation- seed dormancy- methods to
overcome seed dormancy
Plant propagation refers to the multiplication of plant. Methods of propagation are
broadly grouped in to two methods.
(a) Sexual propagation through seeds
(b) Asexual propagation through various parts of plant
Sexual (Seed) Propagation
It refers to multiplication of plants by seed. It is an old and easy method and is widely
used for the propagation of crops. In sexual process, male and female gametes are fused to
produce seed.
Advantages of Sexualpropagation:
1. Seed propagated plants have strong root system and shows tolerance to drought conditions.
2. Seedling trees generally live longer, bear more heavily and are hardier thanvegetatively
propagated trees.
3. Plants propagated by seeds live longer that are vigorous and more resistant to biotic and
abiotic stresses.
4. Most virus diseases are usually not transmitted through seed propagation. Hence, it is
useful in producing virus free plants.
5. Plants which are difficult to propagate, e.g., Papaya and Phalsa by vegetativemethod can
only be propagated by seed.
6. Seed propagation is the only means of creating diversity. Diversity sometimes yield better
plant types known as chance seedlings. Diversity in plant propagation is also essential for
genetic improvement of plant.
7. Seeds of some fruits like citrus, Jamun and mango varieties are capable of giving
out more than one seedling from one seed. These seedlings can be utilized for raising
uniform plants, if they can be carefully detected at the nursery stage.
8. In breeding for evolution of new varieties, the hybrids are first raised from the
seed and it is, therefore, essential to employ this method in such cases.
Disadvantages of seed propagation:
1. Seed propagated plants are not true to the types to the mother plants and show variation.
2. Seedling trees take more time to come to bearing than grafted plants. For example
mango seedlings take 8 -10 years to come to bearing, compared with 3-4 years for grafted
trees.
3. Seedling trees, being very large, pose problems for efficient management of orchard
trees, i.e., harvesting, pruning spraying etc. become more difficult and expensive.
4. Seeds loose viability within a short period.Eg: Citrus, Mango, Jack, Papaya, Jamun,etc.
Seed Dormancy - Reasons for Seed dormancy, Methods to overcome Seed
Dormancy
Dormancy:
Dormancy is a condition where seeds will not germinate even when the environmental
conditions such as water, temperature and air are favourable for germination.
It is observed that seeds of some fruit plants (mango, citrus) germinate immediately
after extraction from the fruit under favourable conditions of moisture, temperature and
aeration. However, in others (apple, pear, cherry) germination does not take place even under
favourable conditions. This phenomenon is called as ‘dormancy’.
In some species, chilling temperature for certain period helps in the termination of
dormancy. Often dormancy is due to several factors and may persist indefinitely unless
certain specific treatments are given.
Methods to overcome Seed Dormancy: Several methods are used for breaking seed
dormancy of horticultural crops.
Softening seed coat and other seed coverings: This helps in better absorption of water and
gases, which ultimately leads to better germination of the seeds. This can be achieved by
scarification.
1. Scarification: Scarification is the process of breaking, scratching, mechanically altering or
softening the seed covering to make it permeable to water and gases.
2. Acid treatment: Dry seeds are placed in containers and covered with concentrated
Sulphuric acid (H SO ) or HCl in the ratio of one part of seed to two parts of acid. The
2 4
containers should be of glass, earthenware or wood, non- metal or plastic. At the end of the
treatment period, the acid is poured off and the seeds are washed to remove the acid.
3. Hot water treatment: Drop the seeds into 4-5 times their volume of hot water with
temperature ranging from 77 to 100oC for 1-2 minutes and seeds are immediately removed
from hot water and soaked in the gradually cooling water for 12 to 24 hours. Following this
the unswollen seeds (which are unable to germinate) may be separated from the swollen
seeds by suitable screens. The seed should be sown immediately after hot water treatment.
4. Stratification: Stratification is a method of handling dormant seed in which the imbibed
seeds are subjected to a period of chilling to after ripen the embryo in alternate layers of sand
or soil for a specific period. It is also known as moist chilling.
Lecture No. 6
Asexual propagation –selection of stock and scion – preparation of scion
branch – grafting and budding methods – graft incompatibility –
characteristics
It is called with different names i.e., Asexual propagation, Vegetative propagation,
Clonal propagation. Asexual propagation is reproduction by means of vegetative parts of the
plant such as roots, shoots, or leaves other than seed.
Advantages:
1. Plants are uniform and true to type to their mother plants.
2. Vegetatively propagated fruit trees come into bearing earlier.
3. Some fruits such as banana, pineapple and some guava varieties being seedless, the only
way of further propagation is vegetative method.
4. Budding or grafting may be used to make certain fruits adaptable in unfavorable
environmental conditions.
5. Non productive fruit trees can be converted into productive fruit trees by means of top
working.
6. The asexual propagated plants are smaller in stature and hence harvesting and spraying
becomes easy
7. Repairing of damaged portion of plants is possible by means of bridge grafting
8. More plants can be planted per hectare (High density planting) because asexually
propagated plants are smaller in height.
Dis-advantages:
1. Lack of tap rootsystem in vegetatively propagated plants results in poor anchorage in the
soil and less tolerance to drought conditions.
2. Vegetatively propagated plants are comparatively less hardy.
3. Transmit viral diseases from plant to plant.
In Asexual propagation benefits are more than the losses, hence these methods are
mostly used.
Plant Propagation methods:
Apomixis: Apomixis is a form of asexual reproduction that occurs via seeds, in which
embryos develop without fertilization. Seeds are formed but the embryos develop without
fertilization. Apomictic seedlings are identical to their mother plants and similar to the plants
raised through other vegetative means, as it has the same genetic make-up as that of the
mother plant
eg: Allium
Bulb: A bulb is a specialized underground storage organ. It consists of shoot and fleshy
vertical stem axis which bears growing point at its apex. Along with bulbs, small
underground bulbs are produced which are known as bulblets. The bulblets when grow to full
size are termed as offsets. The bulblets which are produced in the aerial portion of the stem
are termed as bulbils.
Eg: Onion, garlic
Corm:It is a swollen solid specialized underground structure which possesses distinct nodes
and internodes. It wrapped up in dry, scale like leaves. Eg: Amorphophallus, Colocasia,
Gladiolus.
Stem tuber: A tuber is specialized swollen underground stem which possesses eyes in
regular order over the surface. The eyes represent the nodes of the tuber. The arrangement
of the nodes is spirally in tuber.Eg: Potato, Jerusalem artichoke and Dioscorea, etc.
Tuberous roots: These are thickened tuberous growth that functions as storage organs.
These differ from the true stem tuber i.e.,they lack nodes and internodes. Buds are present
only at the crown or stem end. eg: Dahlia, Sweet potato.
Rhizome: A rhizome is a specialized stem structure in which the main axis of the plant grows
horizontally just below or on the surface of the ground. The stem appears segmented
because it composed of nodes and internodes. Topropagate plants by rhizome, cut the
rhizome into different sections and each section should have at least one lateral bud or eye.
Eg: Ginger, Turmeric, Banana.
Suckers:It is a lateral branch developing from the underground parts of the stem or
roots. The suckers arise from below the surface of the soil. There are two types of suckers.
a) Shoot suckers: These will arise from the base of the stem. The suckers may grow
obliquely upwards and directly give raise a leaf shoot. It strikes roots when it is still
attached to the parent plant or when separated and planted. Eg: Chrysanthemum, Banana,
Pineapple, Yucca.
b) Root suckers: The root suckers will arise from the adventitious buds on the roots.
Eg: Guava, Curryleaf.
Stolon: It is a term modified stem which grows horizontally to the ground above the surface
of the soil. In propagating plants by stolon, the stolon can be treated as a naturally occurring
rooted layer and can be cut from the parent plant and planted separately. Eg. Mint, Bermuda
grass.
Runner: A runner is a thin and long stem which develops from the axil of the leaves, grows
horizontally along the ground and forms a new plant at the nodes where it comes in contact of
soil. When runners develop sufficient root, it is dug out and planted in the field.
Eg. Straw berry, Oxalis, Blue berry, etc.
Offset: Offset is a lateral shoots that produced from the base of main stem of parent plant.
These are shortened and thickened shoots. Eg: date palm, pineapple and banana, etc. After
cutting from mother shoot, these shoots give rise to new plant.
Propagation by Cuttings: A cutting is a part of a plant that will produce roots when put in
soil media and eventually produces a new plant quite true to the parent plant. A cutting may
be a piece of stem, a leaf or part of a leaf, a piece of root, or root stock, or even a scale of
bulb.
Types of cuttings:
Depending upon source of originating, cutting is of three types.
1) Stem cuttings
2) Root cuttings
3) Leaf cuttings
Stem cutting:The selected shoot should be healthy and should not be too vigorously
growing. The cutting must possess at least two to three buds. The lower cut is made around
just below the node and the upper cut is given about 1-2 cm above the upper node at slanting
manner.
Stem cuttings can be divided in to 4 types based on the degree ofmaturity and
lignification of wood used in making cuttings.
A. Hard wood stem cuttings
B. Semi hard wood stems cuttings
C. Soft wood stem cuttings
D. Herbaceous stem cuttings
Hard wood stem cuttings: In this method, one year old and mature shoots are selected for
the purpose of propagation. The length of cutting is kept to 10 – 45 cm. The cutting is taken
during November- February before commencement of sprouting.
Eg: Grape, Fig, Pomegranate, Bougainvillea, Acalypha,Rose, etc.
Semi-hard wood stem cuttings:In this type of cutting, 4-9 months old shoot of semi hard
nature is used for raising new plants. Shoots of 7-20 cm length are used for preparing
cuttings. Eg: Camellia,Citrus,Eranthemum,Acalypha,Geranium, Hibiscus, Jasmine, Lemon,
Olive, etc.
Soft wood cuttings:This type of Cutting is not practiced for fruits. Shoots of 2-3 months age
are selected for soft wood cuttings. The length of cuttings is kept 10-15 cm.
Eg: Nerium, Crotons, Eranthemum, Graftophyllum, etc.
Herbaceous stem cuttings: This type of cuttings is taken from succulent herbaceous plants.
Shoots of 1-2 month age are selected for cuttings.
Eg: Chrysanthemum, Coleus, Carnations, Geraniums, Cactus, etc.
Root cuttings:The plants capable of producing sucker are good for root cuttings. For
propagation,roots of 2-3 cm thickness are selected. The length of cuttings is kept to 10-15 cm.
Eg:Curry leaf, Guava, Millingtonia, Quisqualis, Clerodendron, Raspberry, etc.
Leaf Cuttings:leaf cutting is successful in propagation of ornamental plants. Mostly
succulent plants having thick and leathery leaves are propagated through leaf cutting. The
leaf is separated from mother plant and planted in suitable medium where it gives out roots
and generates a complete plant. Eg:.Bryophyllum, Begonia, Sansevieria, etc.
Layering: It is a technique of propagation in which a portion of plant is forced to produced
adventitious root while it still remains attached to mother plant. In this process, a single
portion of plant constitutes root and shoot. Upon emergence of roots, the shoot is separated
from mother plant, survived in nursery for some time and then planted in the field.
Types of layering:
I. Ground layering: The shoot of the plant is bent downward in the soil using peg or nail
and the ground touching portion is wounded. When the roots emerge out from the wounded
portion, it is then separated from mother plantand planted in the nursery
Eg: Jasmine
Types of ground layering
1) Simple layering
2) Compound or serpentine layering
3) Mound layering or stool layering
4) Trench layering
5) Tip layering
II. Air Layering: It is also known as Chinese layering and pot layering. For the purpose of
air layering, one year old or previous season shoot of pencil thickness is selected. About 5 to
7 cm away from the base of selected shoot, a girdle of 2.5 to 3 cm size by removing the bark
is prepared. The girdled portion of the shoot is scrapped using gunny bag or with rear side of
the blade. The girdled portion is then covered using moist sphagnum moss grass. The girlded
portion is now wrapped using transparent polythene tape and both the ends of tape are tied
tightly.
Depending upon ease of success, rooting appears in about 2- 3 months. When root
emergence is there and it becomes visible from the transparent wrapped tape, the layered
shoot is separated from mother plant. The layered plants are planted in the nursery under
partial shade where frequent watering is provided. Usually air layering is practiced in the
months of July- August.
Eg. Ficus, fig, guava, phalsa, pomegranate, jackfruit
Grafting
Grafting is a technique of propagation in which scion stick and rootstock is connected in a
manner such that they may unite and subsequently grow and develop as a successful plant.
The rootstock of 1-2 year age having pencil thickness and desired attributes is selected for
grafting. On rootstock, the scion of desirable variety is grafted. Generally the scion shoot of
matching thickness as of rootstock is selected. To get success in union of grafting, the
cambium of both the rootstock and scion should unite properly. After performing the grafting
process, the union portion of rootstock and scion should be sealed immediately using
polythene tape or wax. When graft starts growing, the portion of rootstock above graft union
is removed. All the shoots emerge from rootstock from lower portion of graft union should
also be removed from time to time.
Methods of grafting:
a. Inarching/ embracing/ adjuvant grafting
b. Tongue grafting
c. Whip or splice grafting
d. Side grafting
e. Notch grafting
f. Veneer grafting
g. Cleft grafting
h. Bridge grafting
Budding
The process of connecting scion, which is a bud and rootstock in a manner such that
they may unite and grow successfully as one plant is termed as budding. The bud which
develops framework branches and flowers and fruits is termed as scion. The portion over
which bud is united which provides supportive stem and root system to the plant is termed as
root stock or stock. The point at which scion is joined at rootstock is termed as matrix.
Budding is practiced during the period when active sap flow is going on and the
plantis growing successfully. Rootstock of 1-2 year age having pencil thickness is selected
for the purpose of budding.
Methods of budding:
1. T-Budding (Shield budding):
2. Inverted T budding
3. Patch Budding:
4. Flute budding
5. Ring budding
6. Chip budding:
7. I-budding
8. Forket budding:
Selection of rootstock
• It should exhibit a high degree of compatibility with scion cultivars and give maximum
life to trees
• It should be well adapted to agro-climatic conditions of the particular locality like frost,
cold and heat
• Should be resistant to disease and pests prevalent in the concerned area
• Should be tolerant to adverse soil conditions like salt and drought
• Must exhibit favourable and positive influence on the performance, bearing and quality
of scion variety
• Should possess good nursery characteristics like germination, high degree of
polyembryony, ability to attain graft-able size in short period and free from excessive
branching
• It should be easily propagated
• It should have strong root system
Selection of scion: Selection of scion consists of 3 steps
1. Variety selection
2. Mother plant selection
3. Scion branch selection
1. Selection of variety: The selected variety should have the following characteristics
• It should be high yielding variety
• It should give regular yield every year (regular bearer)
• Should come into bearing earlier
• It should have high quality and good colour of fruits
• It should have high demand in the market
• It should grow in various environmental conditions
• It should withstand pests and diseases
• It should withstand strong winds
• Fruits should have long shelf life and should not damage in transport.
2. Selection of mother plant
• Motherplant should be healthy, strong and high yielding.
• Previous 4-5 years data of mother plant should observed and selected
• It is advisable to collect scion from grown-up trees.
3. Selection of scion branch
• Healthy and well-developed vegetative buds must be selected
• Scion wood must be of the previous season but not from more than one-year old plant.
Flowering shoots or shoots from where the harvesting is recently done must be
avoided.
• The scion or bud sticks must be selected from known performing orchard tree
Graft incompatability
It is a condition in which rootstock and scion fails to grow successfully. Generally,
distantly related plants are incompatible and that the closely related ones are compatible. The
inability of parts (stock and scion) of the two different plants when grafted together, to
produce a successful graft union and the resulting single plant to develop satisfactorily is
termed as graft incompatibility. Eg.Apple on pear, pear on quince and apricot and almond
Graft incompatibility has been classified in to two types.
1. Localized incompatibility
2. Translocated incompatability
Localized incompatability:Incompatability occurs at the point of union between
rootstock and scion. It should be overcome by using of inter stock.
Translocated incompatability:Incompatability is due to the distribution of toxic
materials through phloem cells distriction leads to brown colour scars. By using of
interstock also causes incompatability. This cannot be overcome even by inserting an
intermediate stock.
Characteristics of graft incompatability
1. The incomapatability between rootstock and scion.
2. Leaves turns yellow in colour leads to falling down.
3. Tree health should be injured
4. Within 1-2 years tree should be died.
5. At the point of union there should be more growth of tissue leads to swollen stem. In
this, growth differential is observed at the point of union of rootstock and scion. If scion
grows earlier than rootstock it looks like bottle shape or otherwise if rootstock grows
earlier than scion it looks like inversed bottle.
Bottle shape Inversed bottle
Precautions in grafting and maintenance of grafted plants:
1. The cut given on the stock and scion should be smooth and be made with a single
stroke of the knife.
2. Tie the two cut surfaces of stock and scion together tightly with polythene strip
(150µ) or cloth.
3. Watering should be given immediately after grafting and Water the graft without
wetting the graft region
4. Any sprouts on the rootstock should be discouraged and allowing budsonly the on
grafted scion to grow.
5. Staking of grafted plants is needed for up to 2 years to withstand against wind
damage.
6. Bearing of fruits may be discouraged for 2 to 3 years to encourage vegetative
growth or frame work of the plant.
Grafting:
Grafting is a technique of propagation in which scion stick and rootstock is connected
in a manner such that they may unite and subsequently grow and develop as a successful
plant.
Rootstock: The part of the graft that provides root system to the grafted plant is known as
‘Root stock’
Scion: The upper portion of graft combination taken from the desired plant to be multiplied is
known as ‘Scion’
Methods of grafting: Mainly in grafting there are two types.
1. Attached scion methods of grafting
2. Detached scion methods of grafting.
1. Attached scion methods of grafting:In this method of grafting, the scion is still
attached to the mother plant (Scion Plant) till the graft union takes place. Under
attached scion methods of grafting simple inarching is most important.
Simple inarching/ Approach grafting: The distinguishing feature of this method of
grafting is that two independent plants on their own roots (self sustaining) are grafted
together. Select a healthy shoot of having a 3.5cm girth on the selected mother plant which is
to be used as a scion source. Select a root stock (raised in pot) having approximately the
same size as that of the selected shoot on the mother plant. On the internodal region, where
the union is to occur, a slice of bark and wood 2.5 to5 cm long is cut from both the selected
stock and scion shoots. The cut should be given on the stock and scion should be of the same
size. Tie the two cut surfaces together tightly with string or cloth. Eg.Guava, Mango, Sapota.
2. Detached scionmethods of grafting: In this method of grafting the scion is separated from
the scion plant or mother plant just before grafting.
In this method, Veneer grafting is important and is described below.
Veneer grafting:On the stock plant, at the desired height, in the internodal region,
give a shallow inward cut running to a length of about 2.5 to 5cm. At the base of the first cut
make another short and inward cut intersecting the first cut and remove a piece of
wood and bark. On the scion, towards the base, give a long (2.5-5.0cm), slanting cut towards
one side and another short, inward and downward cut on the opposite side. Insert the scion
on to the rootstock such that a contact of cambium is established at least on one side, and tie
them firmly. After the union has healed, cut back the stock above the graft union.
Eg.Avocado, Mango, etc.
Veneer grafting
Lecture No. 7
Growing media for raising nursery plants – plant hormones – uses
Substrate or the medium which is used to grow plants is commonly called the growing
medium. Media is a source of mineral nutrients, moisture and support for the plant.
Characteristics of an ideal propagating medium
• It must be sufficiently firm and dense to hold the seeds or cuttings in place during
germination or rooting.
• The medium must have a good water holding capacity so that frequent is not
necessary watering.
• The volume must be fairly constant when either wet or dry. Excessive shrinkage after
drying is undesirable.
• It should be sufficiently porous so that excess water drains away permitting adequate
aeration.
• It must be relatively free from high level of salts, weed seeds, nematodes and various
noxious (harmful) disease causing organisms.
Different Types of Growing Media
Soil: Soil is the basic natural medium for growing plants and is indeed the cheapest source.
Loamy and porous soil, rich in organic matter with neutral pH (around 7) is good for the
growth of plants. Soil is mixed with sand and farmyard manure (2:1:1) for better aeration,
water-holding capacity and nutrient supply to the plants. The soil-borne pathogens pose a
serious threat to the plants, resulting in lower production.
Sand: Sand is most widely used rooting medium for cuttings (particularly for evergreens) as
it is relatively inexpensive and readily available. However, it does not retain moisture as
others hence needs frequent watering. It contains virtually no mineral nutrients and has no
buffering capacity.
Sand should be fine enough to retain some moisture around the cuttings, yet coarse
enough to allow water to drain through it.
Peat: Peat consists of the remains of aquatic, marsh bog or swamp vegetation which has been
preserved under water in a partially decomposed state. Peat is often added to sand in varying
proportions, mainly to increase the water holding capacity of mixture. This combination
makes an excellent rooting medium for cuttings of most species.
Composition of peat deposits varies widely, depending upon the vegetation from
which it originated state of decomposition, mineral content and degree of acidity.
Sphagnum moss: Commercial sphagnum moss is the dehydrated young residues or living
portions of acid-bog plants such as Sphagnum papillosum, S.capillaceum and S.palustre. It is
relatively sterile, light in weight and has a very high water holding capacity (absorbs 10-20
times its weight of water).
It is generally shredded, either by hand or mechanically, before it is used as
propagating medium. It contains very small amount of minerals. It is also used with sand in
equal parts for rooting stem, leaf and root cuttings. It is mostly used in air layering. It
prevents damping off disease .
Vermiculite: It is a mica-like mineral which expands to open-flake structures on heating at
high temperatures. It is a hydrated aluminum–iron–magnesium silicate. It is very light in
weight (3-5 kg/ cm3), neutral in reaction and retains large quantities of water (1 cubic feet
vermiculite absorbs 14-18 litre of water and releases slowly).
Perlite: It is a grey white material of volcanic origin, mined from lava flows. Perlite is sterile
and has a neutral PH. It improves aeration and water drainage of the nursery medium. It can
hold about 3-4 times its weight of water. Use of perlite keeps the weight of the media lesser
in comparison to soil. It does not contain any nutrients.
Pumice: It is volcanic in origin. It is a light, porous grey or white mineral. It is neutral in
reaction and absorbs large quantities of water. It increases aeration and drainage and could be
used alone or mixed with peat moss.
Leaf mould: To prepare leaf mould, alternate layers of leaves and soil are heaped up
preferably under shade and in between the layers of leavesammonium sulphate + super
phosphate is added. Frequent watering will hasten the decomposition of the leaves. The leaf
mould will be ready for use in about 3 to 4 months. It may contain nematodes, weed seeds
and noxious insects and diseases. Hence, it should be sterilized before using.
Shredded bark saw dust and wood shavings:These materials can be used in soil mixes for
container grown plants, because of low cost, light in weight and easy availability. These
mixes have lower amount of nutrients and hence additional amount of nutrients may be added
to the mixes. However, the shredded bark and wood shaving may contain toxic materials like
phenols, resins and tannins, etc. when fresh. Therefore, these should be composted for 10 to
15 weeks before use.
Use of Plant hormones
Phytohormones: These are theorganic substances synthesized in one part of plant and
translocated to another part, wherein very low concentrations influence the growth and other
physiological functions of the plants.
Plant growth regulators: These are organic compounds other than nutrients, which in small
amounts promote, inhibit or otherwise modify any physiological process in plant.
The naturally occurring (endogenous) growth substances are commonly known as
plant hormones, while the synthetic ones are called as growth regulators.
Plant hormones are grouped into 5 types
1. Auxin
2. Gibberellins
3. Cytokinins
4. Absicic acid
5. Ethylene
1. Auxin: Auxin stimulates cell division, cell enlargement and cell elongation in the apical
region.Auxin inhibits lateral bud formation. When apical bud is removed, lateral buds begin
to sprout. Such phenomenon is known as apical dominance.Auxin increases shoot growth at
relatively higher concentration and root growth at a very low concentration.
Practical uses of auxins: It helps in seed germination, plant growth, control of flower and
fruits drop and root induction.
Commercially produced auxins are divided into 3 groups.
1. Indole group: Indole Acetic Acid (IAA), indole butyric acid (IBA)
2. Napthalene group: Naphthalene Acetic Acid (NAA), Beta napthaoxy acetic acid (B-NAA),
Methyl ester of NAA
3. Phenoxy group: 2,4 Dichloro phenoxy acetic acid (2,4-D), 2,4,5- Trichloro phenoxy acetic
acid (2,4,5-T).
2. Gibberellins: It helps in cell elongation. Plants synthesize 50 types of gibberellins. Among
those, GA3 is more important.
Practical usage: It helps in increasing the plant height, seed germination, development of
seedless fruits.
3. Cytokinins: It promotes cell division. Zeatin, a naturally occurring cytokinin, was
isolated from maize. Commercially, Kinetin is the mostly used cytokinin.
4. Abscissic acid: It is growth inhibitor. It is antagonistic to auxin. It supresses plant growth
and promotes early flowering.
Synthetic inhibitors are Malic Hydrazide (MH), Tri Ido Benzoic Acid (TIBA).
Usage: It reduces sprouting of onion and potato during storage, it inhibits seed germination,
early flowering and reduces plant height.
5. Ethylene: Ethylene is the only gaseous hormone.
Practical usage: ethylene is involved in ripening of friuits, induction of flowering in
pineapple and mango, formation of female flowers in cucurbits. Ethrel is commercial form of
ethylene.
Method of preparation of hormone solution
1 milligram hormone per 1 litre water is 1 ppm.
1 millilitre hormone solution in 1 litre water it is known as 1000 ppm.
Commercial uses of hormones
1. Vegetative propagation: The mostcommonly employed growth regulators for rooting are
auxins like IBA, IAA, IPA and NAA.Among these chemicals IBA is most ideally used since,
it is the most effective one. Concentrations ranging from100-500ppm are used for long dip
method of treatment of cuttings for 12-24 hours and high concentrations of 10,000 to 20,000
for quick dip method for a few seconds. The concentrations differ according to the type of
cutting i.e., herbaceous, Semi-hard wood and hard wood cuttings. Applications in the form
of dust as talcum preparation or in the form of a paste in lanolin are also used.
2. Suppress sprouting of tubers and bulbs: Use of MH, TIBA or NAA solution reduces
sprouting of potato tubers and onions during storage. 50-100 gramsolution is required for 1
ton material
3.A) Early flowering:Use of 2,4-D, NAA and Cycocel improves early floweringor induce
flowering.
Eg: Spraying of 10 ppm NAA solution or 25 ppm Ethrel in pineapple at 40 leaf stage helps in
regulating flowering.
B) Late flowering: MH 100 ppm solution delays flowering.
4. Control flower and fruit drop: If flower and fruit drop in plants occur due to hormonal
deficiency, it can be controlled by spraying of 5-10 PPM 2,4-D; 10-20 PPM NAA or 5-10
ppm NAA. In coconut, spraying of 30 ppm 2,4-D helps in control of fruit drop.
5. Parthenocarpy: Development of fruit in the absence of pollination is termed as
Parthenocarpy.
Eg: In banana, grapes and some varieties of guava, development of parthenocarpic fruits is
possible with the application hormones. Spraying of 500- 1000 ppm GA solution develops
parthenocarpic fruits in lemon, sweet oranges and guava. In lemon spray of 10 ppm IAA
develops parthenocarpic fruits.
6. Frut ripening: NAA, 2,4-D, 2,4,5-T and ethrel is used for fruit ripening. But
commercially ethrel is more commonly used because ethrel improves attractive yellow colour
on fruits.
7. Fruit storage: 2,4-D; 2, 4,5-T or IPA can be used to improve shelf life of fruits
8. Weed control: 2,4-D, MCPA hormones and their salts, Esters and amines are effective in
controlling of weeds. These are more effective in dicot weeds. 2,4-D sodium salts are more
commercially used hormones in weed control.
Lecture No.8
Training-Methods of Training- Pruning-Methods of Pruning
Training refers to the judicious removal of plant part / parts to develop proper shape
of a plant capable of bearing a heavy crop load. Training is a treatment given to the young
plants to get a suitable or desirable shape with strong framework.
Pruning is the removal of unwanted, surplus annual growth; dead, dried and diseased
wood of the plants is called Pruning.
Thus, the training is related to shape and size of plants where as pruning is related
with harvesting better yield and more so harvesting fruits of quality.
Training:
The most important systems of training followed in most of the fruit crops are:
1.Central Leader system or close center system:
• In this system, the central axis or the main branch of the tree naturally grows vertically
upwards and smaller side branches grow from it in various directions.
• If the central leader is allowed to grow indefinitely, it will grow more rapidly and
vigorously than side branches resulting in a robust close centre and tall tree. In such a
tree the bearing is confined in top portion of the trees.
• The main advantage of this system is the development of strong crotches.
• Its main disadvantage is shading lower branchesof the tree.
• Since trees are very tall, harvesting and spraying become difficult and costly.
• This method of training is not suitable for high altitude and hot arid places where wind
velocity is high.
This system is also called as close centre, since the centre of the plant is closed and
also as pyramidal system, since the plant trained looks like a pyramid. This system of
training is practiced in case of certain apple varieties and pears.
Central Leader system
2. Open Centre system:
• In this system of training, the main stem of the plant is allowed to grow only up to a
certain height by beheading it in the young stage i.e.,within an year of planting and
inducing all the subsequent vegetative growth by lateral branches
• This results in the low head in which the bulk of the crop is borne closer to the ground
than in case of central leader tree.
• It allows more light to reach all parts of the tree which is helpful for better
colour development of the fruit and the fruiting area is spread all over the area of the
trees.
• Trees become low headed. So, pruning, spraying, harvesting etc., are facilitated.
• The branches form weak and narrow crotches, which may frequently break undersevere
stress and strain such as bearing of heavy crop and strong winds.
Since the main axis is removed, it leaves the centre open and hence open centre and
the tree looks like a vase (bowl), hence it is otherwise called as vase system. This system of
training is practiced in plums and peaches.
Open Centre system
3. Modified Leader system:
• This is intermediate between the above two systems and has the advantages of theboth.
• This system is developed by first training the tree to the leader type allowing the leader
to grow unhampered for the first four or five years.
• The main branches are allowed to arise on the main stem at reasonable intervals.
• After the required number of branches has arisen, the main stem is headed back and
lateral branches are allowed to grow as in the open centre system.
• This results in a low-headed tree with well-spaced limbs, well distributed fruiting wood
and low height to carryout orchard operations conveniently.
• This system of training is practiced in fruit plants like citrus, pear, apple and walnut etc.
Modified Leader system
Pruning:
Pruning may be defined as the removal of any excess or undesirable branches, shoots,
roots, or any other parts of a plant, so as to allow the remaining parts to grow normally or
according to the desire of the pruner.
Pruning is an art of removing scientifically certain portions of a plant with a
view to producing more and superior quality of fruit. Pruning of any kind according to its
severity, changes the nutritive conditions within the tree and consequently, limits or
encourages fruit bud formation.
Reasons for pruning:
• There always seems to be surplus branches on a tree. But only those, which are useful to
the plant in holding up the leaves to the sun to grow strong. Those which will have little
chance of doing so, because of shade or other reasons become weak and eventually dry
up. If such branches are recognized and eliminated earlier will help in conservation
of food in the tree for better production.
• Removal of diseased twigs to check the spread of diseases
• In some fruit trees, fruits are borne on current flush (Ber, Grape, etc.) which will be
obtained in large number after pruning of certain no. of old branches.
Objectives of Pruning:
• To remove the surplus branches and direct the sap flow in to the
remainingbranches.
• To develop a strong frame work which can carry the load of a good crop and canwith
stand strong winds.
• To train the plants to a definite shape. Eg. Fence, Hedge, Topiary, etc.
• To thin out branches so as to admit more light into the interior of the tree top sothat the
inner wood also becomes fruitful.
• To limit the size of the tree top to a convenient one so as to render spraying andpicking
more easy and economical.
• To regulate the spacing and distribution/ direction of branches.
• To distribute the fruiting wood in all directions and to maintain a balance
betweenvegetative and reproductive phases.
• To improve the growth of the spur (A short lateral branch one inch or less in lengthwith
nodes close together, so that the leaves converge to form a rosette ) shoots andproduction
of more flower buds.
• To check the further spread of the diseases.
• To maintain the vigour of the plant by removing the water shoots and
otherunwanted growth.
Methods of pruning:
1. Thinning out: When a shoot is removed entirely from the inception (from the point of
origin) so that, no new shoot arises from that place, it is referred as thinning out.
2. Trimming: Cutting the growth of the twigs to a pre-determined level as in the case of
fence, hedge and edge.
3. Heading back: When the branches grow tall and vigorously without producing
flowers, these shoots are headed back. When a branch is cut almost to the base,
leaving a few inches of stump, carrying few buds, it is referred as Heading Back. These buds
left on the stump will give rise to shoots which are important to the tree from which flowers
may arise in the following year.
4. Pollarding: Mere cutting back of the shoots, indiscriminately to reduce the height of the
tree is Pollarding.
5. Pinching (tipping): Removal of the tip of the shoot to stop its indeterminate growth or to
encourage the growth of the lateral buds is pinching or tipping. This is practiced in marigold
and chillies at the time of transplanting.
6. Disbudding (nipping or rubbing): Nipping or rubbing of young buds preventing a chance
of their sprouting is disbudding. When the buds arise in wrong places they are rubbed off.
Similarly sprouts (Buds) on root stocks are disbudded.
Immediately after pruning the cut ends are smeared with Bordeaux paste or any copperbased
fungicide to prevent the entry of any insect or fungal pathogen which otherwise enters
through the cut ends ant damages the shoot.
Lecture No.9
Fruit drop-Reasons-Control measures-Fruit harvesting-Determination of
maturity – Equipment for harvesting-Grading-Packing-Storage and
Transport
The fruit drop occurs primarily due to the formation of an abscission layer at the point
of attachment of the fruit with the twig.Several factors have been considered responsible for
the formation of abscission layer. The causes are unfavorable climatic conditions, poor soil
condition, lack of pollination, low stigmatic receptivity, defective perfect flowers, abortion of
embryo, competition between developing fruit lets, drought / lack of irrigation, high
incidence of pests and diseases and hormonal deficiency, etc.
Fruit drop is a very common problem observed on coconut in early stages of
bearing. It is caused by potash deficiency, insufficient irrigation, hormone deficiency and
sometimes due to pest incidence.
If fruit drop occurs due to hormone deficiency, it can be controlled by spraying of 2,
4-D @ 5-10 ppm or NAA @ 10-20 ppm. Spray 2,4-D @30 ppm for control fruit drop
coconut,
The post harvest quality and storage life of horticultural crops appear to be controlled
by the maturity. If the horticultural crops are harvested at a proper stage of maturity, the
quality will be excellent. If harvesting is done too early or too late, the quality and shelf life
are poor. Maturity can be described as the attainment of a particular size, stage after which
ripening takes place.
Maturity indices are important for deciding when a given commodity should be harvested
to provide some marketing flexibility and to ensure the attainment of acceptable eating quality to
the consumer. Fruits picked at the wrong stage of maturity may develop physiological disorders
in storage and may exhibit poor defect quality.
Maturity indices of some fruits and vegetables
S.No. Maturity Index Fruits/ Vegetables
1 Peel Colour Citrus, papaya, pineapple, tomato, grapes, mango
2 Pulp Colour Tomato, mango
3 Size Cucumber, citrus.
4 Drying of plant parts Onion, garlic, banana, potato and ginger
5 Surface characteristics Grape, tomato, water melon and mango
6 Ease of separation from plant Water melon, grape and mango
7 Ease of snapping Beans, okra and peas
8 Netting Musk melon, water melon
9 Aroma Jack fruit
10 Firmness Water melon, apples and pear
11 Acidity Citrus, mango and pineapple
12 Starch index Apple and banana
13 Juice content Citrus (35-50%)
14 Days from anthesis Water melon and pineapple
15 Days from full bloom Mango, citrus and apple
16 Days from fruit set Banana and mango
The basic rules to observe for harvesting are:
• Fruits should not be pulled but clipped.
• Fruits should not be thrown to the ground but should be brought carefully to the ground
in pickers bags.
• Fruits should not be picked during rains or in the morning when the dew is settled on
them, as this moisture develops brown spots on the rinds. Wet produce will over heat if
not well ventilated, and it will be more likely to decay.
• Fruits should not be piled in direct sun after harvesting but should be placed under
shade.Produce exposed to direct sunlight will get very hot. For example, potatoes left
exposed to tropical sunlight for four hours can reach temperatures of almost 50OC.
• Fruits should not be heaped, but spread evenly.
• All the damaged, cut and diseased fruits should be promptly removed and should not be
mixed with healthy fruits.
• Harvest during the coolest part of the day-early morning or late afternoon.
• Fruits harvested too early may lack flavour and may not ripe properly, while produce
harvested too late may be fibrous or have very limited market life.
• Harvesting with improper methods results in damage of crop by bruising which can be
caused by compression (due to overfilling of boxes), impact (due to dropping of crop) or
vibration (due to lose packing during transportation). So, during harvesting factors like
delicacy of crop, maturity criteria, time, method of harvesting, mode of packaging and
transportation should be taken into consideration.
Harvesting machines: Mechanical harvesting devices that employ direct contact methods
such as combing, cutting, pulling, snapping, twisting, stripping and compacting.
1. Shake-catch and collect system: This was designed for the harvesting of deciduous tree
fruits, grapes and blue berries.
2. Pick and collect system: This picks up fruit from the surface of the land and it was
designed for harvesting of walnuts, almonds, pecans.
3. Once-over harvesters: These were designed for the harvesting of vegetable crops grown
for canning and picking, such as peas, snap beans, tomatoes and cucumbers. All the fruits
present on the plant are harvested in one operation.
After harvesting, fruits should be dipped in antiseptic solutions to remove the dust, to
improve the appearance, to remove any spray residue andinfestation of scale insects.Excess
moisture should be removed from fruits after washing, otherwise they are prone to decay.
Grading:After harvesting, fruits/ vegetables should be placed under shade.Immature, diseased
and badly bruised fruits and vegetables are sorted out. Grades are based on size, weight, colour
and shape. Grading is done manually or mechanically. Most of the countries have their own set of
standards of domestic trade and for international trade standards have also been defined.
Packaging: Packaging is an integral element in the marketing of fresh horticultural produce
as it provides an essential link between producer and consumer. Proper packaging is essential
to avoid the spoilage of fruits and vegetable.
• Fruits and vegetables are generally packed in the field without any pre-treatment.
• Some are even transported without any packaging like tomatoes.
• Traditional forms of packaging such as bamboo baskets, wooden baskets and gunny bags
for packing of many fruits like citrus, mango and vegetables like beans, peas, onion,
garlic, okra, potato, etc are widely used.
• Corrugated fibre board boxes are also used for packaging apples, oranges, grapes, sapota,
etc.
Transportation: For selecting the mode of transport, the distance to reach the destination as
well as perishability of the commodity should be considered. For highly perishable ones there
should be minimum temperature rise during transit. The commodity is to be pre-cooled
before packing to remove the field heat. Road transport should be preferred for perishable
commodities than rail transport. For local transport the produce is brought by bullock carts or
tractor trolleys, carts, trailers and trucks used in the field should have good suspension and
low tyre pressure to avoid excessive jolting of produce. They should be driven slowly.
Storage:
One of the most significant factors that affect the quality of fresh produce is storage.
If it is stored in poor storage conditions such as high temperatures, it will lose its nutritional
value or spoil quickly. The management of temperature and relative humidity are the most
important factors determining storage life of horticultural produce. For storage of fruits and
vegetables low temperature and high relative humidity (95%) is required and for storage of
onion and garlic low humidity 70% is required.
Onion and potato are stored for long time and remaining vegetables are stored for few
days or few weeks. Potato and onion are stored in different methods.
Sprouting in onion can be suppressed for 8 months by spraying of Maleic Hydrazide
(MH) @ 2000 ppm on the leaves of the crop at least 15 days before harvesting.
Lecture No. 10
Production technology of Mango – Varieties – Propagation – Manures and fertilizers –
Intercultivation– Training and pruning - Harvesting – Yield – practices to be taken to
get fruit production every year
Scientific Name: Mangifera indica
Family:Anacardiaceae
Mango is the most important among the tropical fruits of India and it is very
popularand considered to be the choicest of all fruits grown in India. It is known as the,“King
of fruits”, owing to delicious quality of fruit, richness in vitamins and mineralsand liking to
Indian palate.Mangooccupies the pride place in India,thus it deserves to be ―the national
fruit of India. No other country can surpass India in the number of varieties and richness of
theirflavour. Ripe mango is exceedingly refreshing to eat and is an excellent source
ofVitamin-A and C.
India’s share is around 52% of world production i.e. 12 MT as against world’s production of
23 MT. In India, it is cultivated in an area of 12.3 lakh hectares occupying 22% of the total
area under fruits in India.The important mango growing districts in Telangana are
Khammam, Jagtial, Rangareddy, Nagarkurnool, Mancherial, Mahabubabad, Siddipet,
Suryapet, Vikarabad, Yadadribhuvanagiri, Sangareddy and Wanaparthy.
Mango varieties: There are nearly 1000 mango varieties in India. Of these,however only
about 20 varieties are grown on a commercial scale. The commercialvarieties of mango in
India are specific to different regions of the country.
Classification of mango:
Table varieties: Baneshan, Totapuri, Kesar, Suvarnarekha, Hemayath,
Juicy varieties: Chinnarasam, Peddarasam, Cherukurasam,
Kothapallikobbari,Panchadarakalasa
Table and juicy varieties: Chinnasuvarnarekha, Peter.
Off-season Varieties: Neelum, Bangalora, Baramasi, Rumani,Royal special.
Pickle varieties: Achar pasand, Tellagulabi of Nuzivid, Alipasand, Guddemar(Hamlet)
Mango Cultivars/ hybrids and their characters
1. Table varieties
Banganapalli: A widely cultivated, early-maturing mango of south India. Its fruits are large-
sized, weighing on an average 350-400g. The pulp is fibreless, firm and yellow with sweet
taste. Fruits have good keeping quality.
Kesar: Kesar is an irregular-bearing mango. Fruits are medium-sized. Flesh is sweet and
fibreless. Fruits ripen to attractive apricot-yellow colour with red blush. It has good
processing quality.
Dashehari:It is a mid-season mango. Fruits are medium-sized, with pleasant flavour, sweet,
firm, and fibreless pulp. Stone is thin and keeping quality is good.
Totapuri:Totapuri is a regular and heavy-bearing mango. Fruits are medium to large. Fruit
quality is medium. It has a typical flavour and flat taste.
Suvernarekha: Fruit is medium in size and ovate oblong in shape. Fruit quality is medium
and keeping quality is good. It is an early season variety.
2. Juicy varieties
Peddarasam: Fruit heavy in weight, oblong shape, skin color is greenish yellow. Pulp is
light yellow in color with high quantity of fiber and excellent fruit quality.
Chinnarasam: Fruit medium to small sized, oblong shape, Pulp is dark orange in color with
low fiber and excellent fruit quality. It is a regular bearer.
KothapalliKobbari/ KobariMamidi: Fruit shape is oblique oval, mature fruit is yellow
colour, skin thickness is medium, skin texture is smooth, abundant fiber quality and pulp is
yellow in color.
Cherukurasam: Fruit medium sized, oblong shape, Pulp is yellow orange in color with low
fiber and excellent fruit quality.
3. Hybrids
Mallika (Neelum x Dashehari): Regular-bearer, high TSS, good colour, uniform fruits,
moderate keeping quality.
Amrapali (Dashehari x Neelum): Dwarf, regular-bearer, cluster bearing, small-sized fruits,
good keeping quality
Ratna (Neelum x Alphonso): It is a regular-bearer, fruits are medium sized, free from spongy
tissue.
Sindhu (Ratna x Alphonso): It is a regular bearer, fruits medium sized, free from spongy
tissue and very thin and small stone.
Manjeera (Rumanix Neelum): It is dwarf, regular and prolific bearer with firm and fibreless
flesh.
PKM 1 (Chinnasuvernarekhax Neelum): It is a regular bearer, heavy yielder and bears fruits
in clusters.
Arka Puneet (Alphonso x Banganapalli): It is a regular-bearer, attractive skin colour,
medium-sized fruits, free from spongy tissue.
4. Off season varieties
Royal special: Fruit small sized, roundish. Pulp is light yellow in color with a thick skin,
high quantity of fiber and excellent fruit quality.
Baramasi: Fruit small sized, roundish. Pulp is light yellow in color with high quantity of
fiber.
Bobbili punasa Fruit is medium sized. Pulp is yellow in color with medium quantity of
fiber.
Climate: Although, it is a tropical fruit, mango equally grows well under
semitropicalconditions. Mango can be grown up to 1100m above mean sea level. However, it
cannot be grown on a commercial scale in areas above 600m. There should not be high
humidity, rain or frost during the flowering period.It can grow in temperature range of 24-27
°C
Soils: Mango can be grown on a wide variety of soils, ranging from alluvial tolateritic,
provided it is deep (2.0-2.5m) and well drained. Suitable pH for mango is 5.5-7.0.A soil with
good drainage,permeability, fair water holding capacity andground water at a depth of 3-4m
are features of an ideal soil for mango. Very poor,shallow, alkaline, rocky and calcareous soil
should be avoided.
Propagation: Mango is a highly heterozygous and cross pollinated crop. There aretwo types
i.e.Monoembryonic and Polyembryonic. Polyembryonic varieties can be propagated through
seed because they produce true to type seedlings where as themonoembryonic varieties need
to be propagated vegetatively.Inarching or approach grafting is the principal method of
propagation followed byveneer grafting.
Planting: Planting is generally done with a ball of earth during rainy season inmoderately
rainy places and on the cessation of rains in the heavy rainfall areas.Planting is done in
previously dug, exposed and filled pits of 1m X 1m X 1m size. Application of nitrogen to
young plants hastens growth. Before filling the pits, 50 kg of well-decomposed FYM, 2
kilograms of Super Phosphate are added. 100 to 150 grams ofFolidol power should be added
per pitif white ant problem is there. Planting is done on a cool day and preferably in the
evenings and wateredimmediately and staked. While planting grafts, the graft joint or the
union should be20 cm above the soil surface to prevent entry of disease carrying organisms in
to thegraft joint.
Spacing: Generally, square system of planting isfollowed in which plants are planted at 7-10
m distance. In fertile soils, 12 m spacing can also be adopted. In high density planting for
Manjeera and Mahamooda, the spacing recommended is 4.5 X 4.5 m and for Amrapali it is
2.5 x 2.5 m.
Manures and fertilizers: Good cropping, regular bearing and high fruitquality are the prime
objectives of bearing trees.For non-bearing trees liberal doses of Nitrogen, phosphorous and
reasonableamounts of potassium are to be applied. During non-bearing stage nitrogen
isparticularly needed in heavy quantities to support healthy and fast growth.
It would be advantageous to apply substantial portion of nitrogen in the form
oforganic matter, so that the texture of the soil, its moisture holding capacity andultimately
the development of roots there in may be improved.
Manurial schedule:
Age of the FYM(Kg) Nitrogen Phosphorous Potash
plant (grams/plant) (grams/plant) (grams/plant)
1-3years 5-20 50-100 40-80 100-200
4-6 years 25-50 100-200 80-100 200-400
7-9 years 60-90 200-250 120-160 400-600
10 yearsand 100 250 160 600
above
The manures and fertilizers are applied in a shallow ring dug around the base of
thetree in young orchards. In old bearing orchards, they are broadcasted under thecanopy of
the plant leaving 30-60 cm from the trunk and thoroughly mixed into thesoil.
In Telangana, the manures andfertilizers are applied in two split doses. First dose is
given during June-July, consisting of complete Nitrogen with half Potash at the onset of
monsoon. The second dose is appliedduring September-October with FYM, Super Phosphate
and remaining half of Potash.
Inter crops and Interculture: Intercropping can be taken with Phalsa, Papaya and Pineapple
or vegetables if irrigation facilities are available. Cover crops like Sun hemp, Daincha, Cow
pea, Cluster bean, etc. can also be grown during rainy season and ploughed into the soil
before the end of the rainy season. Often young mango plants produce flowers. These are
pinched of during first 3-4 years. Otherwise, the vigour of the plant is lost. Removal of weeds
is required at least twice a year. Weeds have to be controlled by the spraying of Atrazine @
800g in 240 Litwater. Root zone of the trees must be kept weed free throughout the growth
period. Mango requires no pruning except removal of dead, diseased and dried parts and
branches arising within 3 feet above the ground level. This will help in easy cultivation.
Irrigation: Newly planted young plants should secure irrigations twice in a week for the first
4-6months in hot weather. Irrigations must be frequent and regularfor the first 4-5 years
becausethe root spread in the initial years is not very extensive.In bearing trees, 2-3 months
preceding flowering season, i.e., during October-December profuse irrigation is not advisable
to induce flowering and also to arrestvegetative growth. Irrigation may be beneficial from
February to June. This prevents thefruit drop and helps in development of fruit size. When
the trees are in full bearingstage, generally 2-3 irrigations are given between fruit set and fruit
development. Avoid irrigations before harvesting for better quality of the fruit.Basin system
of irrigation is generally followed for efficient utilization of water. The basins maybe
connected in series or to a channel dug in-between rows. For newly established plantation
drip system of irrigation gives good result.
Training: Training of mango plants in the initial stages is very essential to givethem proper
shape.At least 75cm of the main stem should be kept freefrom branching and the first leader
of main branch should be allowed later. Themain branches should be spaced in such a way
that they grow in different directionsand are at least 20-25cm apart. Otherwise there is a
chance of breakage due tosmaller crotch angles and heavy top.
Pruning: Proper pruning of mango trees after the harvest gives the best results interms of
disease and pest management, diversion of food materials to the productiveshoots, increased
photosynthetic activity and increased carbohydrate and starchcontent, early production of
new flush that bear the crop in the next season. Pruningalso helps in increased Abscisic acid
which inhibits thevegetative growth and promote flowering. Thus, pruning helps in obtaining
regularfruiting and production of quality fruits.
Flowering and fruit set: Grafted mango usually starts bearing from the 4th to 6th year
afterplanting. Seedling trees usually take about 8 years to come to bearing but their
productive lifeis much longer.
Flower bud formation takes place 2-3 months prior to flowering. Flowering occurs
from November-December to February-March depending upon region and variety and
continues for about 2-3 weeks. Flowers are polygamous; sex ratio can be improved by
application of NAA 200ppm at flower bud initiation stage.It takes 4-5 months for the fruit to
mature. Ripening of the mango depends on the perfect flowers in the inflorescence.
Formation of these perfect flowers depends on the variety and place of growth. It ranges from
1-80%
Eg. Jahangir -1%
Baneshan -3%
Alphonso -10%
Neelum -16%
Dashehari -80%
Fruit Drop: Fruit drop is serious problem in mango and cause great loss to the growers. A
tree producing several thousand panicles yields only a few hundred fruits. Most of the
flowers falling down after full bloom or at later stage of development. Only 0.1 to 0.25%
perfect flowers or even less develop into mature fruit. Fruits drop at all stages of maturity.
Maximum fruit drop takes place in last week of April or first week of May depends upon
prevailing conditions. The fruit drop can be divided in to three distinct phases Eg., Pin head
drop, post setting drop and May drop.
This may be due to competition between developing fruits, drought or lack of
irrigation, adverse weather conditions and incidence of serious pests and diseases. This can
be minimized by regular irrigations during fruit development, application of optimum doses
of nutrients, effective control of pests and diseases and hormonal sprays like 2,4-D @ 10-30
ppm, NAA @5-50ppm, 2,4,5-T@20ppm, etc.Provision of wind beaks all around the orchards
prevents drop due tohigh velocity winds at the time of fruit development.
Harvesting of fruits:
It requires considerable experience to judge the stage ofmaturity at which the fruits
are to be picked. If the fruits are harvested at animmature stage, they develop white patches
and the normal TSS/ Acid ratio is alsonot obtained. Appearance of bloom (Whitish waxy
layer), characteristic colour or spots onthe skin and development of typical flavour of a
variety are also importantindications of maturity.When a few ripe fruits have fallen on their
own from the tree, the restof the fruits are considered to be sufficiently mature.
The usual practice of harvesting the fruits i.e., knocking down the fruits or shaking the
trees violently to get the fruit down need to be discouraged. If the fruit is hanging high, it
should be picked up with the help of a step ladder. The harvested fruits should always be
placed in canvass bags or padded baskets and carried to the packing house. A small fruit stalk
should be kept with the fruit at the time of harvesting helps in keeping the fruits in better
condition in transportation and storage.
Storage: Fruits can be stored at 8-10°c and 85-90% RH for about 4-6 weeks depending upon
the variety.
Yield: Yield of mango depends on many factors like age of the plant, soil fertility, climatic
conditions, variety, type of plant material like graft or seedling, management of the orchard
etc.
8-10 t/ ha –varieties
15-25t/ ha - Hybrids
Alternate (Biennial) and Irregular bearing in Mango
It is a burning problem inmango industry sinceit renders cultivation of mango less
remunerative to thegrowers. When the mango tree bears heavy crop, the bearing season is
called ‘on’year. When it bears a poor or lean or no crop, the season is called ‘off’year. In
boththe years the mango grower is at a loss. In the ‘on’year, there is abundant fruitingand the
market is flooded with fruits and the prices fall down. In the off year, there isscarcity of fruits
for supply to the market, prices are highly remunerative but the growerhas a very little or no
fruits to supply to the market. Most of the promising varieties like Dashehari, Langda,
Mulgoa,Kesar, etc. are prone to this malady.
In some instances, failure to crop in one year is not followed by normalcrop. Instead,
two or more bad years succeeds before a good cropping year occursagain. Thus, the rhythm
of bearing is not strictly alternate but irregular and erratic.
The non-bearing intervals seem to be longer in neglected orchards and old ones,while
it tends to appear a biennial bearing or alternate bearingin good orchard.
Various factors will be associated with this problem can begrouped as—internal
factors and external factors.
Internal factors: Physiological, genetical, nutritional, sex ratio and hormonalimbalance.
External factors: Rain, wind, low temperatures, cloudy weather, light, pests anddiseases.
Suggested measures to overcome alternate bearing:
• Planting of varieties which are regular bearers Eg: Totapuri, Rumani, Banglora, Neelum,
Mallika, Amrapali and Ratna.
• Plough and harrow the orchard twice in a year, in the beginning of the monsoon after
harvest and in October.
• Apply the fertilizers as per recommended schedule.
• After the harvest of the crop, dead and diseased branches are removed.
• Deblossoming: Half the no. of flower clusters are removed from the tree in the on year
as soon as they emerge. The food reserves of these deblossomed shoots would be utilized
by the tree in producing vegetative growth in the spring and summer and mature to
produce.
• Ringing: A ring of bark of about 1.25cm wide is removed from branches of about 15 cm
thicknesses. Ringing causes concentration of large amount of carbohydrates in the branch
above the ring and it would put forth blossoms instead of vegetative growth. Ringing has
to be done in month of August. This is not advisable as it devitalizes the tree and should
not be followed as a regular practice.
• Over vigorous trees may be subjected to induce rest by withholding irrigation with good
exposure to sunlight. Application of common salt @ 2.5 kg per tree in September checks
vegetative growth causing accumulation of carbohydrates for induction of flowering.
This is practiced in over-vigorous trees and not on weak trees.
• Pruning: Proper pruning of mango trees after the harvest gives the best results in terms
of disease and pest management, diversion of food materials to the productive shoots,
increased photosynthetic activity and increased carbohydrate and starch content, early
production of new flush that bear the crop in the next season. Pruning also helps in
increased cytokinin content, Ascorbic acid and auxin, which was beneficial for
flowering. Abscisic acid level inhibits the vegetative growth and promotes flowering.
Thus pruning helps in obtaining regular fruiting and production of quality fruits.
• Hybridization: By crossing good quality variety with regular bearing varieties may be
helpful in inducing regular bearing tendency in to the hybrid. Eg. Mallika and Neeleshan.
• Providing orchards with wind breaks, regular ploughing and liberal manuring at
appropriate intervals and adequate irrigation and other cultural practices are also
recommended for regular bearing.
• Spraying Ethrelduring October at 200 ppm at 20 days interval till flowering appears.
• Spraying 1% urea immediately after harvest of fruits in rain fed orchards and
prophylactic sprays against mango hopper during September- October, also helps in
regularity in bearing.
Lecture No. 11
Production technology of Banana– importance –climate-soils – varieties – propagation–
–planting – spacing –training and pruning – application of manures – intercultivation–
harvesting – yield.
Banana
Botanical name: Musa spp.
Family: Musaceae
Banana is one of the oldest fruits known to mankind.Banana is also known asApple
of Paradise.
Importance:
• Every part of the plant has a ready use.
• The ripe fruits are delicious and are used for table purpose.
• The fruits of some cultivars are used as breakfast food after steaming.
• The end of the inflorescence, technically known as pendant is cooked as a vegetable.
• Many products are made from banana such as banana chips, soft drinks, flour and jam.
• Banana flour is prepared from unripe fruits and banana powder from ripe fruits.
• Starch is manufactured from pseudo stem.
• The pseudo stems of banana of all types have been used for manufacturing paperboards.
• In South India, the leaf of Banana is used as a plate for serving meals.
• The sheaths and leaves are used for making crude ropes.
• The banana species Musa textiles is well known for their strong fibre.
Owing to its multifaceted uses - from underground stem up to the male flower - it is
referred askalpatharu(a plant of virtues).
Banana is the second largest produced fruit after mango in India accounting for 21.87
per cent of the total fruit production from 10.49 per cent of the area.
Climate: The banana is a tropical crop. It grows luxuriantly in the warm, humid and rainy
climate of tropical regions of the equator. It grows well in regions with a temperature range
of 10-40°C and optimum range is 25-30°C. Low temperature of less than 10°C is unsuitable
as they lead to a condition called choke or impeded inflorescence and bunch development.
Banana grows well under high rainfall areas. 500-2000 mm rainfall per annum appears to be
satisfactory for growth. Banana comes up well up to an altitude of 1500m above sea level in
the tropics. Absence of strong winds and cyclones are important.
Soils: Banana requires a well-drained soil with plentiful organic matter. Even though banana
requires heavy irrigation, it cannot withstand water stagnation. Therefore, the soil should be
well drained and deep (At least 1-1.5 m depth).It grows successfully in loamy soils, well
drained clay soils of delta areas, irrigated medium soils. Saline soils with salinity percentage
exceeding 0.05 are unsuitable. Banana can grow well even under slightly alkaline soils. Such
soils are found preferable for avoiding the wilt disease, which is known to be severe in acid
soils.
Characteristics of important Banana varieties:
Poovan/ Karpurachakkarakeli: The plant is tall, hardy and grows vigorously. One of the
distinguishing characters of the plant is the rose pink colour on the outside of midrib. Fruit is
medium to small, yellow skin, firm flesh with sub-acidic taste, good keeping quality.Average
bunch weight is about 15kg. It is resistant to panama wilt and fairly resistant to bunchy top
highly susceptible to banana bract mosaic and streak virus.
Rasthali: The plant is tall and can be easily identified by the yellowish green stem with
brownish blotches. Reddish margins of the petiole and leaf sheath. The average bunch weight
is about 12 kg. Fruits are medium, thin skin, yellow colour flesh, firm, sweet with a pleasant
aroma. It has the disadvantage severe susceptibility to Fusarium wilt, easy dropping of fruits
from bunch. Susceptible to sun injury and formulation of hard lumps in the pulp.
Dwarf Cavendish/ Basrai: It is the most important commercial cultivar of India. The plant is
dwarf, fruit is large, curved; skin is thick and greenish; flesh is soft and sweet. Even after
ripening the fruit is greenish in colour but fruits ripening during winter season develop yellow
colour. Keeping quality is not good; the average bunch weight is about 20kg and suitable for
high density planting and susceptible to leaf spot disease.
Robusta: It is a semi tall sport of Dwarf Cavendish. The plant bears bunches weighing 25-30
kg each with good-sized slightly curved fruits. Plants take approximately a year to complete
their life-cycle. It is highly susceptible to Sigatoka leaf spot limiting its cultivation in humid
areas but is resistant to Panama wilt.
Grand Naine: It is a tall mutant of Dwarf Cavendish. Plant characters resemble with Dwarf
Cavendish except for its robustness, well-spaced hands, fingers of bigger size and heavy
bunches. It bears bunches weighing 25-30kg with uniform long fingers throughout the bunch.
However, it requires propping unlike dwarf Cavendish.
Bontha/ Monthan: It is fairly tall and robust, growing to a height of 2.5-3.0m. Stem is
yellowish green without pigmentation and very shiny. Inflorescence is bold and hangs
parallel to the pseudostem. It’s bunches weighing 18-20 kg each bear 60-70 fruits which are
pale green in colour.
Red Banana: The colour of the pseudostem, petiole, midrib and fruit peel is purplish red.
The fruit is of good size and has a characteristic aroma. The average bunch weight is 20 kg. It
thrives well in humid tropics and at higher altitudes. It is highly susceptible to bunchy top,
Fusarium wilt and nematodes.
Propagation:
Banana is traditionally propagated vegetatively through suckers or rhizome or tissue
culture plants.
Banana produces two types of suckers 1. Water suckers. 2. Sword suckers.
1. Water sucker:
Have broad leaves and broad pseudostem and they don‘t produce a healthy banana clump and
hence not suitable for planting.
2. Sword sucker:
It has a strong large base, gradually tapering to a slender point with one or two narrow sword
like leaves at the tip. The sword sucker is most vigorous, grows fast and with early bearing.
Hence, sword suckers are preferred for planting.
Important criteria for selection of suckers for planting:
• The orchard/mother block should be disease free
• The weight of the suckers should be 1.0- 1.5 kg
• The mother plant should be a heavy yielder
• Always select sword suckers for planting
• Select the suckers free from rhizome weevils
• Age of suckers should be 3-4 months.
o The whole or split rhizomes can also be used when suckers are not available.
o Bits of rhizomes may also be used as a planting material.
o Tissue cultured plants are also used as planting material on commercialscale.
Land preparation: The land should be deeply ploughed, harrowed and leveled and pits of
45cmx45cmx45cm should be dug at the required spacing. The pits should be exposed for
weathering for about a week to control the presence of any grubs, ants, weevils, etc. The soil
from the pits should be mixed with 5-10 kg FYM, 0.5 kg of castor or neem cake, 2 kg of
wood ash and 200 g of Super phosphate.
While filling the pits with the manured soil, apply 50 grams of lindane dust to the pit
to control weevil which affects the rhizome or sucker in the soil. The sword suckers are later
planted straight in the pit along with a portion of rhizome at a depth of 10-15cm.
Planting: The period of planting should be such that the active growth phase of the plant may
continue un-hampered during the flower bud initiation stage or stage at which embryonic
bunch is formed inside the Pseudostem that occurs between 4 and 5 months after planting. At
this stage there should not be any extreme cold or hot weather or lack of soil moisture or lack
of nutrients in the soil.
In general,onset of monsoon i.e. June is the best time for planting banana. In the
heavy rainfall areas, planting is done after the cessation of monsoon from September to
October. This also makes the plants quite small during the expected periods of high winds,
storms and cyclones etc.
Spacing: The spacing varies greatly according to the variety and climate.
Variety Spacing (meters)
Poovan,Monthan,Rasthali&Nendran 2.1X2.1
Dwarf Cavendish, Robusta 1.8X 1.8
Nendran 2.0X 2.0 or 2.4X 3.0
Hill bananas 4.8X 3.0 or 4.8X 4.8
Cultural operations in Banana:
Desuckering: Desuckering or pruning is the removal of unwanted suckers. If all these
suckers are allowed to grow, the mother plant looses its vigour resulting in lower bunch
weight and total yield. Therefore, the suckers should not be allowed to grow near the parent
plant till the mother plant commences flowering.
Trashing:Removal of undesirable material from the banana field like dried, diseased and
decayed leaves, pseudo stem after harvest, male bud, last end of inflorescence and withered
floral parts.
Mattocking: After harvest of the bunch, the plant stem should be cut after 30-45 days to
facilitate mobilization of the nutrients from the mother to the developing ratoon plant. The
pseudo stem should be cut leaving a stump of about 0.6m height.
Wrapping of bunches: It is covering of bunches with polythene or gunny cloth that protects
the fruits from intense heat, hot wind, etc. toimprove colour of the fruits.
Tipping: Process of removal of heart or male bud. It should be cut soon after the bunch is
formed, otherwise it is likely to use up some of the food, which would otherwise go to the
development of fruits.
Removal of floral remnants: The removal of dried and persistent floral remnants present at
the apex of the fruit or finger helps in preventing the spread of fungal diseases. These floral
remnants provide shelter to some of the fungal spores.
Propping: It is a method by which support is given to banana bearing plants with the help of
bamboo or eucalyptus poles, protecting them from bending or falling down due to heavy
bunch load and from heavy damage by wind. It is essential for tall varieties.
Earthing up: It should be done during the rainy season to provide drainage and to avoid
water logging at the base. It is to be done once in 2 or 3 months to prevent soil erosion from
the basins and to avoid direct contact of water with pseudo stem.
Weeding: In the first four months after planting, it is necessary to remove weeds. The stirring
of the soil by the spade after every 6 or 7 irrigations is necessary to maintain its tilth and
absorptive power. Use of Diuron @ 4 kg/ hectare and Simazine @ 6kg/ hectare control
grasses and broad leaved weeds when applied after planting and repeated 30 days after
planting.
Fertilizer application: Banana is a heavy feeder, Due to shallow root system, it responds
well to applied nutrients. The high fertilizers requirement is mainly due to their rapid and
vigorous growth and high fruit yield. 200-250g Nitrogen, 30-40g Phosphorus, 200-250 g
potassium per plant is required. Fertilizers have to be applied before initiation of
inflorescence in 3 splits i.e. 2nd, 4th and 6th months after planting.
Fruit maturity and harvest:
• Under favorable conditions, banana starts flowering in 9-12 months
• Fruits matures in 4-5 months depending upon varieties, climate, etc.
• Banana are harvested at 3/4th maturity stage for distant markets or for chips making
purpose while, for local markets are harvested at full maturity.
• The following are the indications of maturity of banana.
• Drying of top leaves.
• Changing of fruit colour from green to light green.
• The floral ends of fruits are shed with slight hand touch at apices.
• Fruit become plumpy and angles are filled & disappear.
• One or two fruits ripe at the basal end (yellow colour).
• Starch content of the fruit (22-25%).
• The bunches are to be harvested by leaving 2 ft of peduncle on the bunch.
Fruit ripening:
• Bananas are not usually allowed to ripen on the tree;
• Smoking has to be done with straw leaves & cow dung in a closed chamber for 18-24
hours in summer and 48 hours in winter and later shifted to ventilated room for uniform
ripening.
• The exogenous application of 100 ppm ethylene gas in an enclosed chamber for 24 hrs
for will produce uniform colour and ripening.
Storage:
• Banana can be stored at 13°C with the Relative Humidity of 85-95 % for 3 weeks
• The fruits should not be stored / shifted under refrigerated condition.
• The storage life can be increased by keeping the fruits in high concentration of carbon
dioxide and low concentration of oxygen.
• Also storing in sealed polythene bags containing ethylene absorbent like potassium
permanganate.
Yield: Yield of banana varies with variety, agroclimatic situation and management practices.
Tall cultivars usually yield 15-20 t/ ha. Dwarf varieties yield 30-40 t/ ha.
Lecture 12
Production technology of Grape
Botanical Name: Vitis vinifera
Family: Vitaceae
Grape is one of the most delicious, refreshing and nourishing fruits. It is the largest
produced fruit of the world.In India,grape is cultivated in an area of 0.14 million ha with a
production of3.12 million MT.
In India, all most all the produce will be consumed as table fruit, while in
Europeancountries 99% of their produce is used for preparation of wines. Grapes are alsoused
for preparation of raisins, fresh juice and Jams,etc. Thegrape fruits are rich in sugar and
particularly in hexose and are easily digestible. It isfairly a good source of minerals like
Calcium, Phosphorous and Iron and vitamins B1and B2.
Climate: Grape is a Semiarid subtropical crop. It requires warm and dry summerand cool
winter. Humid weather is not congenial for sweetness of the fruit which causescracking of
fruits and encourages fungal diseases. It thrives well in regions with a temperature range of
15-40°C and 50-55 cm rainfall.
Soils: Light soils are ideal but they can grow well on any well drained soil. Water table
should be deeper than 2 m. Grape vines are relativelytolerant to salinity and alkalinity
while,excessive lime is harmful. Soil PHof 6.5-7.5 is ideal.
Varieties:
Thompson Seedless: It has wide adaptability with seedless, golden-yellow berries with
medium-thin skin. The juice is straw coloured, Sweet with a TSS content of 20-22%. Variety
has a good keeping quality and is used for table purpose and raisin making. Average yield is
20-25 t/ ha.
Anab-e-Shahi: Late maturing and heavy yielding variety. Berries are elongated, medium
large, seeded and amber coloured when fully ripe. Juice is clear and sweet with TSS content
of 14-16%. It is highly susceptible to downy mildew. Average yield is 35 t/ ha. Fruits have a
good keeping quality and mostly used for table purpose.
The important commercially grown varieties are- Bangalore blue, Gulabi, Anab-e-
Shahi, Dilkush, PatchaDraksha, Pusa seedless, Thompson seedless, Beautty seedless and
Perlette
Raisin grapes:
Pusa seedless, Kishmish, Black Corinth and Sultana, etc.
Seedless varieties: Thompson seedless, Taj-a-Ganesh, Kishmish Cherry, Beauty seedless
Seeded varieties:Anab-e-Shahi, Dilkush, Bangalore blue.
Propagation: Grape can be propagated both by Sexual and Asexual methods.Sexual
propagation is associated with poor germination and delayed period for germination,
etc.Vegetative propagation in grape is practiced through cuttings, grafting, layering
andbudding depending on the varieties used and the growing conditions.
Propagation through hardwood cuttings is the most popular method of propagationin
grape. Cuttings made from well matured one season canes from productive vineswhich are of
medium in thickness (0.7 to 0.8 cm), and 25-30cm in length with at least 3-4 buds and
dormant should be selectedpreferably from the October prunings. The lower cut should
begiven immediately below the bud and the upper cut should be about ½above thebud. They
are planted in well prepared flat beds, leaving two nodes above the soilsurface. To
controltermites in the nursery beds, at periodical intervals, treat the soil withAldrin or
Heptachlor dust. The rooted cuttings will be ready for planting in the mainfield after one
year.
Spacing: Spacing will depend on soil, climateand vigour of the variety, method of training,
pruning and cultivation practices. For Anab-e-shahi 4.5x4.5 m spacing and for Thompson
seedless 3x3 m spacing is followedin Hyderabad region.
Planting: Land Preparation before planting grape vine is essential. The land isprepared by
deep ploughing and follow up by tillage and the land shouldbe leveled. Pits of 1m3 are dug at
required spacing. Rooted cuttings are planted in Januaryor February. When rootstocks are
planted, budding or grafting is done in July-August. Either chip or wedge grafting can be
followed.
Training: Training mainly concerns with giving the form and the direction of the trunk and
armsand the position of the shoots. In the natural habitat, a grape vine is robust climber but it
can be trainedon any fashion.
Different types of training systems are
1. Bower system
2. Kniffinsystem
3. Telephone trellis system
4. Head system
5. V-cardon system
Training system adopted widely in India is the bower system.
Bower System/Arbour/ Pergola
Owing to vigorous and pronounced apical dominance of vine in the tropics, this
system is suitable for many of the commercial grape cultivars. Though it is very expensive
but found most appropriate one and associated with highest yield.
In this system, vines are spread over a pandal mounted at 2-2.4 m above the ground
on poles made up of concrete, stone or iron. Growing tip is pinched off at 15-20 cm below the
pandal level. The shoot should be more than 6mm thick at the point of pinching. Two shoots
arising in opposite direction from the main stem are allowed to grow. They are called as
primary branches. On each of these primary branches 3-4 pairs of secondary arms are
retained on either side of the branch at a distance of 45-50 cm in dry regions awhile in
comparatively cooler and humid areas they are allowed at an interval of 60-75 cm. The
growing secondary branch of more than 6 mm thickness should be pinched to develop tertiary
branches. This will give rise to 12-15 tertiary branches (canes) on each secondary branch.
Pruning: Pruning is the most important operation for the maintenance of fruitfulness and
quality along with vigour of the vine. In our state, pruning is done twicein a year, once in
summer and again in winter.
Summer pruningis done during February-April. In this pruning, the canes are cut back to
one or two budlevel for building up the fresh vegetative growth. Hence it is called back
pruning orgrowth pruning.
Winter pruningis done during September-October. In this pruning, the mature canes (about
6 months old) are pruned. Entirefoliage and immature shoots are removed. Anab-e-shahi and
Bhokri are pruned to 5 bud level, Thompson seedless to10 buds and Bangalore Blue to 4
buds. This pruning is also calledas forward pruning/ fruit bud pruning.
Manures and Fertilizers: Grape requires high fertilizers.At the time of planting, fill the pit
with50 kg of FYM,3kg of super phosphate,5 kg ofcastor cake or neem cake and two baskets
of wood ash with top soil or silt.
After the establishment of the vines the following manurial schedule isadopted in
subsequent years of growth.
Fertilizer 1st year 2nd year 3rd year onwards
Summer Winter Summer Winter
Urea 100 500 500 750 750
Super phosphate 200 1500 1500 2000 2000
MOP 500 500 500 1000 1000
Castor cake 5000 5000 5000 6000 6000
Spray magnesium sulphate @ 2g/L, Zinc sulphate @ 2g/ L and soil application of
borax @ 15-30g to overcome micro nutrient deficiency.
Irrigation: Grape vine requires judicious irrigation for optimum growth and yield. During
initialyear of planting, vines may be irrigated frequently. It requires 6-8 irrigations after April
pruning till onset of South West monsoon. Vines are not irrigated from June-October.8-10
irrigations may be given at 7-10 days interval after October pruning till March.Each adult
vine needs 200 lit water in winter and 300 litin summerper irrigation.
Watering the vine just before pruning may increase the flow of plantsap. Irrigation at
berries ripening time makes the berries less sweet.Hence, withholding of water before
pruningand also while the fruits are ripening is a sound practice.
Inter- culture: It is not feasible to grow any inter crop and frequent shallow tillage
isdesirable. The vineyard should be kept free from weeds by shallow digging of 8-10 cm
depth in 15-20 days interval.
Fruit thinning: Thinning of berries at pea stage increases the berry size by 20%, fruit quality
with high sugar content in Anab-e-shahi and lowered the acidity in sub-acid varieties like
Bhokri. Improvement in colour of berries and earlier maturity are the other advantages due to
thinning. It also includes removal of diseased, misshapen and shot berries.
Increasing berry size: Increase in berry size was reported when GA was applied at 40ppm
at bud and flower stagesin Anab-e shahi, Kishmis and Bhokri varietiesHigher concentrations
resulted in the increase in the length of berries.
Harvesting: Grapes should be harvested when they are fully ripe. The criteria for maturity
are:
• The bunches should be fully developed and every berry should attain a uniform size,
shape and colour.
• The bunch is ready for harvest when the lower most berry of the bunch is soft and
sweet.
• The berries should develop translucent look of colour peculiar to the variety. Anab-e-
Shahi develop amber or light honey colour.
• The seeds of the ripened berries becomes dark brown
• Total soluble solids also give the indication of ripening. Anab-e-shahi is harvested
when it records a brix of 15-16° and Thompson seedless 21-22°
• The bunches should be harvested when they are ripen on the vine as they are not
subjected to post-harvest ripening process.
The bunches are harvested with secateurs or scissors. Then the immature and
rottenberries are removed with the help of scissors. Then they are packed in wooden orcard
board boxes or bamboo staked baskets. The paper strips are used to avoiddamage to the
berries.
Yield: Yield depends on the type of soil, variety etc.
Anab-e-shahi-10-15 t/ acThompson seedless – 6-8 t/ ac.
Lecture No. 13
Production technology of Citrus – Species and varieties of citrus -
Management practices
Citrus
Botanical Name:Citrussps.
Family: Rutaceae
Citrus fruits are a group of fruits comprising of mandarins, sweet oranges, limes
lemons,etc., Citrus fruits have a prominent place among popular, extensively grown tropical
and subtropical fruits. In India, citrus is considered to be the third most important fruit crop.
Citrus fruits contain Vitamin C and Phosphorus. The mild bitterness in juice is due to
the presence of glucoside called Naringin which is said to have a medicinal value. The rind
of the citrus fruits is rich in pectin and essential oils.
Important citrus species: There are several citrus fruits in the world. some important citrus
species are
1. Sweet orange: Citrus sinensis
2. Mandarin Orange: Citrus reticulata
3 Acid lime: Citrus aurantifolia
4. Lemon: Citrus limon
Important citrus cultivars grown in India:
1. Sweet Orange: More than half a dozen varieties are cultivated. Important ones are
Sathgudi, Batavian and Mosambi.
2. Mandarin Oranges: This group of orange is otherwise called Kamala orange. The
important commercially grown varieties are- Nagpur Santra, Satsuma Mandarin, Coorg
Mandarin, Khasi Orange, Kinnow Mandarin and Darjeeling orange
3. Limes and Lemons: These are acid fruits. Generally employed for preparing drinks.
Limes: These include Acid lime, Tahiti lime, Sweet lime, Coorg lime, Rangapur lime and
sour lime. The variety commonly grown in the State is Kagzi lime/ Acid lime. Its fruits are
small to medium; pulp is juicy greenish with strong adherence to the skin. Skin is yellowish
green, thin or papery and shiny. The important varieties of acid lime are Vikram, Pramalini,
Balaji, etc. Balaji and Petlur selection-1 varieties are tolerant to Canker.
Lemons: Often confused with limes. These are grown in small scale in pockets. Eureka,
Malta, Seville are varieties under cultivation.
Lime Lemon
1. Fruits are usually smaller 1. Fruits are large
2. Lime fruits are typically round and green in 2.Lemon fruits are ovoid with a pointed tip at the
color end and the ripened fruit is bright yellow in color
3. Rind is thin 3. Rind is thick and easier to peel
4. Pulp is yellow in colour with more acid flavor 4. The pulp is pale yellow, juicy and with slight
acid flavour
5. Flowers are white in colour 5. Flowers are purple in colour
Climate:
The sub-tropical climate is the best suited for citrus growth and development. The
best growth performance occurs at temperature of 32°C. Dry and arid conditions coupled
with well defined summer having low rainfall are most favourable for the growth of the crop.
High humidity favours the spread of many diseases. Moderate annual rainfall of i.e., 750 mm
are ideally suited to Sweet orange and Acidlime. They can be grown successfully even up to
an elevation of 900m above mean sea level.
Soil: Citrus can be grown well in wide range of soils. A well- drained loamy soil of uniform
texture upto depth of 2-3 m having good fertility is considered ideal for cultivation. The plant
is highly sensitive to waterlogged situation. Heavy soils, if well drained, yield good crops but
the cultivation becomes difficult. Citrus fruits flourish well on light soils with a good
drainage. Deep soils with pH range of 6.5 to 7.5 are considered good. Presence of Calcium
carbonate concentration within feeding zone may adversely affect the growth.
Propagation:
Sweet Orange: It is propagated by Shield or T- budding. The root stocks mainlyused are
Jamberi and Rangapur lime.
Acid Lime: It is commonly propagated by seed all over the country because theseeds exhibit
a high percentage of polyembryony.
Lemons: It ispropagated by budding on Jambheri in the Deccan region.
Mandarins: Mandarins are largely propagated by seed all over the country
exceptNagapurSanthra which is the only budded variety grown on a commercial scale around
Nagapur in Maharastra
The varieties to be propagated should be wellknown for their good performance and
free from diseases. The root stock should be compatible with the scions and well adapted to
the soils of the regions where tressare intended to be grown.
Planting:
Preparation of the field: Pits of 1 m3 are dug in square system at a spacing of 6 x 6 m for
both sweet orange and acidlime and filled with a mixture of top soil, 50 kg farmyard manure,
1 kg SSP and 10% lindane powder.
Planting Season: Planting of budded plants and seedlings is done during July to December
with the help of planting board. While planting, care should be taken to see that the bud-joint
should always be above the ground level. The plants should be watered and staked
immediately after planting to avoid wind damage.
Manures and fertilizers:
It is recommended that 50% of Nitrogen should be applied in the organic form (25 %
FYM and 25% oil cakes) and the remaining 50% in the form of chemical fertilizers. Manures
are applied in two equal split doses i.e. first dose in December-January, second dose in June-
July. Large quantities of farmyard manure and organic cakes (Castor, Neem, Pongamia,etc)
improve soil structure and create favourable conditions for healthy growth. Further, to meet
the high demands for nutrients and to maintain plant productivity, organic manures are
supplemented with chemical fertilizers. The recommended fertilizer schedule is
Age of the Sweet orange / plant Acid lime
plant N P O K O N P O K O
2 5 2 2 5 2
(g) (g) (g) (g) (g) (g)
1st year 300 70 80 375 150 200
2nd year 600 140 160 750 300 400
3rd year 900 210 240 1125 450 600
4th year 1200 280 320 1500 600 600
5th year 1500 350 400 1500 600 800
Fertilizers should be applied in a circular band at a radial distance of 120 cm from the
trunk of the plant is the most beneficial.
In pre-bearing orchardsa composite spray of the micronutrients is prepared(i.e.,5g of
Zinc sulphate, 3g of Copper sulphate, 2g of Magnesium sulphate, 2.5g of Ferrous sulphate,
2g of Manganese sulphate, 1g of Borax, 6g of Lime, 10g of Urea mixed in 1 lit Water)and
sprayed twice or thrice at 20-25 Daysinterval commencing from the appearance of new flush
will correct deficiencies andincreases the yield and quality of fruits
Irrigation: Sweet orange trees are much more specific in their water requirementthan any
other fruit crops. Irrigation should be given when the top of the soil goes dry. Irrigation water
should not directly touch the treetrunk as it spreads diseases like gummosis and the soil
should not be allowed to get excessively dry as it results in leaf fall. Double ring method of
irrigation is followed. Irrigation should be given immediately after manuring.Water is very
essential duringblossoming and fruiting periods. Any shortage of water during maturity
periodscauses shrinking of the fruit and drying up of the pulp.
Interculture, Intercrops: Before manuring, the basins are dug and the weeds are removed.
The tree basins should be kept free of weeds. Superficial cultivation of citrus orchards is
practiced to keep them free of weeds. Deep cultivation should be avoided. Root stock sprouts
water suckers and dead wood have to be periodically removed and cut ends are pasted with
Bordeaux paste. Application of post emergence weedicides like Glyphosate @ 8ml/ L or
Gramoxone @ 5ml/ L along with 10 g of Ammonium sulphate is more economical
Leguminouscrops like Soybean, Gram, Groundnut, Cow peas, French bean, Peas, etc.
may be grown in citrus orchards. Intercropping is advisable during the initial three-four years
after planting.
Bahar Treatment: Generally, the trees may bloom and fruit irregularly throughoutthe year.
In order to overcome this problem and to force a full crop in any of thethree seasons, as
required by the grower and the traders, Bahar treatment ispracticed in citrus orchards. Citrus
trees generally bloomthree times a year, i.e., in January-February (Ambebahar or Angam),
June-July (Mrigbahar or Edagam) and September-October (Hasthabahar or Gairangam).
Trees are treated forAmbebahar (January-February), in November or December. In this
method, fromNovember onwards the amount of water is gradually reduced in
successiveirrigations and completely stopped in December. About the middle of December,
theland is ploughed. When the trees start showing wilting symptoms (3-4 weeks), thesoil
around the tree to a distance of 120 cm is dug a depth of 10 cm and therecommended manure
is added to the soil and the trees are irrigated. The firstirrigation that follows is sparing while
the subsequent ones are more plentiful.
Flowers appear about a month after the first irrigation. In Maharashtra, the rootsare
also exposed for about 10 days as part of the bahar treatment. Consequently, plants givenew
vegetative growth, profuse flowering and fruiting. . However, this treatment isconsidered to
be harmful in the long run and not encouraged as a routine practice.
Training and Pruning
• In pre bearing orchards, the plants should be trained to grow straight and to build a
strong frame work.
• Root-stock sprouts, water suckers and dead wood should be removed periodically and
the cut ends are smeared with 1 % Bordeaux paste.
• Never prune the plants during monsoon and wet climates.
Control of Fruit drop
Early and pre-harvest fruit drop is common in citrus fruits. Reasons are nutrient deficiency,
hormonal deficiency, lack of irrigation and unfavorable climatic conditions.
Control of fruit drop:
• Maintain balance nutrients in the plants to develop sufficient foliage to support the
developing fruits.
• Prune the plants after harvesting to minimize pest and disease incidence.
• Irrigation should be applied at critical stages viz., flowering, fruit set and fruit
development.
• Spray GA3 10 ppm + urea 1% at the time of flowering
• Spray 2, 4-D 15 ppm + Benomyl / carbendazim 1000 ppm + urea 1% one month after
fruit set when the fruit size reaches pea size.
• Spray ZnSo4 (0.4%) + MgSo4 (0.2%) + CuSo4 (0.3%) at fortnight interval will decrease
the fruit drop and increase the fruit yield.
Harvesting: Generally, Citrus trees start bearing fruits in 3-5 years from planting(although
economic yields start from the fifth year and the trees may take 8 to 10years to achieve full
productivity) and can be harvested 5 - 6 months from floweringdepending on the variety and
the environment.
Season Flowering time Harvesting time
Ambebahar January-February September-October
Mrigbahar June-July March-April
Hasthabahar September-October May June
Yield:
Average yield in Sweet orange is 16-20 t/ac (1200-1600 fruits) and acid lime is 12-14 t/
ac(3000-5000 fruits/ tree).
Lecture No. 14
Production technology of Pomegranate and Papaya – Management
Practices
Pomegranate
Botanical name: Punica granatum
Family: Punicaceae
Pomegranate fruit is liked for its cool and refreshing juice besides its use as a table
fruit. The juice is considered to be useful for patients suffering from leprosy. The bark and
rind of the fruit are commonly used against dysentery and diarrhoea. The rind of the fruit is
also a source of dye, which gives yellowish brown colour and is used for dyeing wool and
silk. Flowers yield a light red dye used in dyeing clothes.
In India, Maharashtra occupies first place in pomegranate production. In Telangana, it
is mainly grown in Nalgonda, Mahabubnagar, Rangareddy, JogulambaGadwal and
Nagarkurnooldistricts.
Climate: Pomegranate is mainly subtropical fruit. However; it can adopt to wide range of
climatic conditions and can grow up to 1800m above sea level. The tree grows best in
semiarid climate where cool winter and hot dry summer prevail. The tree requires hot and dry
climate during the period of fruit development and ripening. The optimum temperature for
fruit development is 38°C.The tree cannot produce sweet fruits unless the temperature is high
for a sufficient long period. Under humid conditions, the sweetness of the fruit is adversely
affected.
Soils: It can be grown on varied types of soils. The deep loamy or alluvial soils are ideal for
its cultivation. It can tolerate slightly alkaline soils. It can thrive well on comparatively poor
soils where other fruits fail to grow. It can also be grown in medium and black soils. It is
rated as salt-hardy fruit plant.
Varieties: The edible part of pomegranate fruit is the juicy outgrowth of the seed called the
aril. Good taste, flavour and attractive seed colour (Aril) are favoured by the consumers, but
all these characters are not found in any single cultivar. However on the basis of yield and
other quality characteristics various varieties have been recommended for commercial
cultivation.
Ganesh:It is a selection from ‘Alandi’. It has medium sized fruits, aril is pinkish with sweet
juice. Seeds are very soft. Fruit surface is smooth, yellow with red tinge, round in shape
average fruit weight 325 g.
Mridula: Fruits are medium sized, rind smooth, and dark red in colour. Arils are blood red
with very soft seed, juicy and sweet taste. It is significantly superior to other commercially
grown pomegranates. The fruits weigh between 230-270g.
Ruby (Ganesh x Kabul x Yercaud):This was released from IIHR, Bangalore. The fruits
resembles like Ganesh variety with reddish brown skin with green stripes on skin, soft seeded
with bigger size and red coloured arils and it is a heavy yielder (16-18 t/ha).
The other important commercially grown varieties are Bhagwa, Bedhana, Jodpur, Red
Dholka, Alandhi, Musket Red, Jalore seedless, Jyothi, Papershell
Propagation: Pomegranate plants raised from seed are not uniform and vary widely which
are undesirable and hence to be raised vegetatively. Among the vegetative methods of
propagation hard wood stem cuttings, air layering and root suckers are the important
methods.
Among these methods, Stem cuttings are universally used for raising plants on
commercial basis. Mature wood is used for making the cuttings. Cuttings of 20-25cm long
are prepared from high yielding plants of 1 year old wood. Treatment of cuttings with IAA
200 ppm solution improves rooting markedly. The plants are usually ready for transplanting
within 8-9 months.
Land preparation and planting: Land is prepared thoroughly prior to digging of pits. 60-75
cm3 size pits are dug before the onset of monsoon. The pits are filled with 20-25 kg of FYM,
1 kg of Super phosphate and 25 g of phorate granules with the good soil mixture. The plants
are planted usually in the beginning of the monsoon in South India.
The distance of planting in many improved varieties is 5 X 4 m. However, planting
distance of 3 X2.5 m or 4X2 m has been reported to produce high and economic yield of
good quality fruits.
Training: Pomegranate may be trained as multi-stemmed tree or single stemmed tree.
1. Single-stemmed tree: The single stem is left by removing all the side shoots at the time of
planting. The main stem is headed back at a height of about 1 meter results in the formation
of branches. Four or five well distributed branches on all sides above 60 - 75 cm from the
ground level are allowed to grow. In the third year of planting one can maintain desired shape
of the pomegranate. Single stemmed tree has tendency to produce less number of shoots.
The single stem system has its own disadvantages. The plants have a tendency to
produce ground suckers, making the plant bushy. As such it is difficult to train the plant to a
single stem. The crop is highly susceptible to stem borer and shoot hole borer. Thus single
stem system of training is uneconomical for commercial cultivation. Therefore, multi stem
system of training is more prevalent in the country.
2. Multi-stemmed tree: In this method, 3 - 4 stems are left at hill and remaining shoots are
removed. In Maharashtra, the growers prefer multistem training by retaining all stems. But
yield has not been found to be affected by number of stems per plant.
Pruning: Pomegranate plants don’t require pruning except removal of ground suckers, water
shoots and crisscross branches, dead and diseased twigs and giving a shape to the tree. In
pomegranate fruits are borne terminally on short spurs arising from matured shoots. Limited
pruning of exhausted spurs to encourage the growth of new ones is practiced.
Flowering and crop regulation: Depending on climatic conditions of a particular location,
pomegranate has different flowering and fruiting seasons in India. Under tropical climate of
South India, with mild winter, the growth and flowering continues throughout the year.
Similar pattern is also observed in sub-tropical, central and Western India. In the above areas
there are three seasons of flowering.
Pomegranate produces flowers on previous season‘s growth as well as on one year to
two years old spurs. Flowers are borne on leaf axils and also sometimes terminally.
The three distinct seasons of flowering in pomegranate have been named as:
Season Flowering time
1. Ambebahar February-March
2. Mrigbahar June-July
3. Hasta bahar September-October
Selecting a bahar at a location depends on availability of water for irrigation,
occurrence and extent of fruit damage by insect-pests and diseases affectingfruit quality,
climate of the area and availability of fruit in the market.
Bahar Treatment for crop regulation: A fully grown pomegranate has a tendency to bear
flowers and fruits throughout the year. Owing to this, higher yield is not obtained during any
period. Therefore, to obtain higher fruit yield during a particular period, pomegranate plants
are given a resting period by which the natural tendency of trees is altered with artificial
means. Manipulation of flowering in a desired direction is called bahar treatment. This
treatment also helps in getting uniform and good quality fruits with a maximum production
with fewer incidences of pests and diseases. Bahar treatment include root pruning, root
exposure, use of chemicals, with holding water for about two months before flowering.
Normally only two bahar treatments i.e.Ambebahar and Mrigbahar are followed in
our state. For practicing Hasthbahar, the trees have to be forced to go in to dormancy by
withholding water during August-September. This is rather uncertain because of the rains that
occur during this period.
Ambebahar is practiced by withholding water after the end of monsoon. When the
trees shed their leaves in October-November, subsequent land operation, manuring and
irrigation induce the plants to flower during December-January and the fruits mature during
July-August. This bahar is economical wherever irrigation facilities are available.
InMrigbahar, the growth of plants has to be suppressed during December-April by
withholding water. The trees shed their leaves in March and remain dormant till May.
Subsequent soil operation followed by application of manures and fertilizers and irrigation till
the rainy season, induce flowering and fruiting where the fruits are harvested during October-
November.
Manures and fertilizers: It is a hardy fruit plant, growing successfully in low fertile soils.
Both macro and micro nutrients affects its growth, development and productivity. One year
old plants should be manured with about 10 kg of FYM and 150 to 200 grams of Ammonium
sulphate. This amount is increased every year, so that a five year old plant gets 50 kg FYM
and 1 Kg of Ammonium sulphate. The adult bearing trees are applied with 675g of Nitrogen,
250g each of Phosphorous and Potash. In case of zinc deficiency Zinc sulphate @ 5 g per
litre of water is dissolved and sprayed twice on the new foliage. For controlling boron
deficiency, soil application of Borax @ 12.5 g per plant or borax @ 2 g per lit is dissolved in
water and sprayed.
Irrigation: The plants may be individually watered daily or about a week after planting.
After the plants are well established, in about 6 months, they can stand considerable amount
of drought and irrigation may be given at intervals of 2 to 4 weeks depending upon the soil,
climate and weather conditions.
Regular irrigation is essential from flowering to ripening of fruits as irregular
moisture condition results in dropping of flowers and small fruits. It may also lead to the
development of cracks on mature fruits which ultimately reduce the market value and
consumer acceptance.
Maturity indices:
• External colour of fruit changes from green to yellow or red yellowish brown.
• Fruit becomes soft.
• Ridges on the fruit become flat.
• Floral parts on the fruit dry out.
• Fruits when tapped produce a metallic sound or cracking sound.
Harvesting: Generally, the fruits ripen in about 5 to 7 months from the time of flowering
stage. Mature fruits should be immediately picked from the plants after maturity stage, as
delay in harvesting leads to fruit cracking. All the fruits should be harvested in 2 to 3 pickings
within a span of 1 month. Immediately after harvesting, fruits are kept in plastic crates and
taken to a cool place. Later, the fruits are cured in shade which makes the skin harder and will
stand better in transportation.
Yield:Average yield is about 80-120 fruits/ tree (16-20 Kgs)
Physiological disorder:
Fruit cracking: It is a serious problem and is more intense under dry conditions of the arid
zone. The cracked fruits show reduction in their fruit weight, grain weight and volume of
juice. The fully grown mature cracked fruits loose their keeping quality and become unfit for
marketing.
Prolonged drought causes hardening of peel. If this is followed by heavy irrigation or
rains the pulp grows and peel cracks. Cracking of fruits is also due to rise in air temperature
during fruit growth and development. This disorder may also develop due to boron
deficiency in young fruits and moisture imbalance in mature ones. It is also a varietal
character, since the rind thickness and texture are related to proneness to cracking. The
percentage of cracked fruits is also related to season. Mrigbahar (June-July) crop is more
susceptible to fruit cracking because of variation in humidity. Ordinarily regular rains are
received up to August, so that the fruit continues to develop. If there is a break in rains the
growth of the fruit is arrested. As a result of this dry period the skin looses its elasticity and
becomes hard. When there is a rain again the growth restarts resulting in cracking of fruits
because of lack of elasticity of fruit rind.
Control:
• Adequate and regular irrigation and interculture throughout the bearing period
• Cultivating tolerant/ less prone types like Guleshah, Bedana, Khog and Jalore seedless
and avoiding cultivation of susceptible varieties like Kabul and Khandhari
• Spraying Borax @ 0.1 to 0.2%
• Spraying of GA3 in the month of June at 250 ppm
• Planting wind breaks around the garden.
Papaya
Botanical name: Carica papaya
Family: Caricaceae.
Papaya is one of the important fruit crops of tropical and subtropical regions of the
world. Besides its use as a fresh fruit, Papayas can be processed as Jam, Syrup, Preserves,
Papaya candy, canned fruits, salad, and jelly. Papaya is also a commercial source of protease
enzyme,Papain. Papaya fruit is highly nutritive and is very rich in Vitamin A. It improves
digestion and said to cure chronic constipation, piles and enlarged liver and spleen.
Climate: Papaya is essentially a tropical fruit crop and grows best in sunny places. It is very
sensitive to frost but withstands extremes of temperature. It thrives well in regions with a
temperature range of 32-38°C. It also flourishes well in regions up to an elevation of 1100m.
It is adapted to a wide range of rainfall conditions ranging from 35cm to 250cm annually;
however, excessive moisture adversely affects the crop as well as fruit quality.
Soils: It can be grown on a variety of soils provided the soils are well drained. Under water
stagnated conditions and in soils with poor drainage foot rot disease may cause heavy
mortality. Hence, heavy soils should be avoided. A loamy soil with a PH of 6.5 to 7.2 is
considered ideal. Medium black and alluvial soils are also suitable.
Varieties:
Based on the sex expression, papaya varieties can be classified as dioecious and
gynodioecious.
1. Dioecious: Bears male and female flowers separately on different plants.
eg: Washington, CO1, CO-2,CO-4,CO-6, Pusa Dwarf, Pusa Giant
2.Gynodioecious Bears female (Pistillate) and Hermaphrodite (Bisexual) flowers separately
on different plants.
eg: Coorg Honeydew, Solo, CO-3, Pusa Delicious, Pusa Majesty
Some of the commercially grown improved varieties of papaya are: CO1, CO-2, CO-
3, CO-4, CO-5, CO-6, CO-7, Washington, Coorg Honeydew, Honeydew, Pusa Dwarf, Pusa
Delicious, Pusa Giant, Pusa Majesty, Surya, Red Lady, etc.
Honey dew: It is dioecious with less percentage of male plants, semi tall variety, bear fruits
low on the trunk heavily. This variety is popular all over India, also known as Madhu Bindu.
Coorg honey dew: Selection from Honey dew. This variety produces hermophorodite and
female plants. Fruits borne on female plants are almost seedless and are of excellent quality.
Pusa dwarf: The plants are dwarf, dioecious and medium yielder. Bears medium sized fruits,
suitable for HDP and home gardens.
Co-2: It is a dioecious, semi dwarf, medium tall type, very good for papain extraction. It
yields 5-6g of papain per fruit.
Washington: It is hardy and dioecious in nature. Fruits are round to ovate in shape and
medium sized, weighing 1 kg to 1.2 kg on an average with yellow pulp. It yields about 60 kg/
plant.
Propagation: It is mainly propagated by seeds. Vegetative methods of propagation are not
possible due to the hollow and fragile nature of its stem.
Freshly extracted seeds germinate better and grow quicker. The fresh seeds are
cleaned of the pulpy material adhering them, dried in shade. About 400 -500 g of seed is
required for raising crop in one hectare. Seedlings can be raised in nursery beds or in
polythene bags. Seeds are sown at a spacing of 5cm within the row and 15 cm between rows.
Seeds germinate within 15-20 days. In about 2 months, seedlings grow to a height of 15 to 20
cm and are ready for transplanting.
Planting: The land should be ploughed deep, harrowed and leveled. Pits of size 45cm X
45cm are dug and spaced about 2.5 m apart each way. This would accommodate 1666 plants
per hectare. The pits after weathering are filled with top soil mixed with 5 kg of FYM, 100
grams of neem cake and 40 grams of super phosphate. Four seedlings should be maintained
per pit till the identification of female and male progenies. Finally one female plant per pit
and one male plant for every 10 female plants should be retained in dioecious type. Normally
male plants flower earlier (pendulous hanging inflorescence with branched stalk) than female
plants. The best time for planting in most parts of India is the beginning of the monsoon in
the light rainfall tracts and close of the monsoon in the heavy rainfall tracts.
Manuring: After thinning of male and female plants first dose of 110 g of urea, 310 g of
super phosphate and 80 g of muriate of potash should be applied. The same dose should be
applied at 2 months interval from second month of planting onwards and a total of 6 doses
should be given.
Irrigation: Papaya is very specific in its irrigation requirements. Lack of moisture results in
stunted growth and poor fruiting. During summer, irrigations are to be given at 5-6 days
interval and during winter 8-10 days interval. Ring system of irrigation is better. This method
prevents water coming in contact with the trunk.
Interculture: Land should be ploughed and harrowed cross wise at least twice in a year.
Frequent weeding around the stems is necessary.
Harvesting:
Papaya starts flowering in 5-6 months after planting. Fruit setting commences a fortnight
after flowering. Fruit takes 4 to 5 months to reach full maturity. Fruits come throughout the
year. The maturity is well indicated by colour change and the consistency of latex. The latex
of mature fruits becomes watery. Fruits for local consumption should be picked when the
green colour is half way changed into yellow and for distant market, it is necessary to pick
sooner, after the blossom end has turned colour. Individual fruits should be harvested by
twisting by hand without damage.
Yield: Average yield is about 75-100 t/ ha. Papaya gives peak yield during 2nd year and
decline by third year. Economic life of papaya is 2 to 3 years.
Papain extraction: Papain is the proteolytic enzyme present in the milky latex obtained from
green fruits of papaya. Papain is used in medicines, cosmetics, tanning industry, tenderization
of meat and fish, extraction of animal and plant protein from various animals and plants, etc.
The latex should be tapped from 75 to 90 days old immature papaya fruits early in the
morning up to 10.00am. On the selected fruit, four longitudinal incisions should be given
using a razor blade attached to bamboo splinter. The depth of the cut should not be more than
0.3cm.The tapping has to be repeated four times on the same fruit at an interval of 4 days.
The latex should be collected in aluminum trays and shade dried. The dried latex is then
packed in polythene bags. Before drying, potassium meta-bi-sulphate (KMS) 0.05% has to be
added to the latex for better colour and keeping quality. The latex can also be dried in oven at
a temperature range of 50-55 °C.
Papain yield ranges from 1.23g to 7.45g per fruit and the cultivar. Washington variety
recorded the highest yield of 7.45g per 100-150g of dried latex/ tree/ year.Papain extraction
during cool and wet period gives more papain. July to
August is the best period for papain extraction.
Varieties suitable for Papain: CO-2, CO-4, CO-5, Coorg honeydew, Pusa majesty
and Pusa delicious.
Lecture No. 15
Production technology of Guava and Cashew nut
Guava
Botanical Name: Psidium guajava
Family: Myrtaceae
Guava is a subtropical crop. It is one of the most common and major fruits of
Indiaand is considered the fourth most important fruit in area and production after
mango,banana, and citrus. It is a hardy and prolific bearer and highly remunerative fruit.
Guava is the rich source of Vitamin Cand a fair source of Vitamin A and B2
andminerals like calcium, phosphorus and iron. Guava fruits are used for making jam, jellies
and variousculinary purposes. The fruits can be canned in sugar syrup.
Climate: Guava cultivation can be extended to varying agroclimatic regions owingto wider
adaptability. Guava can be successfully cultivated both under tropical andsubtropical
conditions. It growsbest with an annual rainfall below 100cm restricted between June-
September.Under heavyrains and high relative humidity brings down the quality of fruits.
Optimumtemperature requirement is 23-28°C.The areas having distinct winter season are
considered the best for increasing yield andquality.
Soil: Guava adapts well to a wide range of soils. Well-drained, light sandy loam to clay soils
are good. Since it is a hardy fruit crop, it can be grown on alkaline soilswastelands, etc. It is
sensitive to waterlogged conditions. It tolerates a wide range ofpH from 4.5 to 8.5.Some
varieties like Lucknow- 49 can also be grown insaline soils.
Varieties:Based on seed content in guava there are two types: Seedlessand seeded varieties.
Seedless guavas are triploids with irregular shape and lowproductivity.Hence, unfit for
commercialcultivation. Seeded guavas are diploids; more commercial, high yielders with
excellentquality.
Based on colour of the flesh again there are two types—White fleshed and red
fleshed.Among these two, white fleshed are more common and red-fleshed are lesscommon.
Important seeded, seedless and hybrid varieties commercially grown are:
Seeded varieties:Allahabad safeda, Lucknow-49, ArkaMridula, Redfleshed and Allahabad
Surkha,etc.
Seedless varieties: Nagapur seedless,Saharanpur seedless
Hybrids:
Safed jam- Allahabad Safeda x Kohir
KohirSafeda- Kohir x Allahabad safeda
Other varieties like Nasik, Banarasi, Hafsi, Anakapalli,Harijha and Chiitdar, etc. are
also considered as good cultivars.
Propagation: Guava can be propagated both by seed and vegetaively.
Seed Propagation: This practice is not advisable because this would lead to lot of
variationamong trees in fruit size, yield and quality.
Vegetative methods of propagation: The commercial method of propagation for guava is
air layering/ ground layering/ inarching
• Air layering or ground layering can be practiced for multiplication of guava plants and
the best time for doing this is rainy season. It is more commonly practiced in South India.
It is very convenient, cheap and easy method. The layered plant being on its own roots
grows more vigorously and establishes quickly even in difficult soil conditions.
• Inarching is another common method of vegetative propagation and it is good to do it in
the month of July-August for high success.
Planting: The field should be deeply ploughed and properly leveled before planting.Pits of
75-100 cm3 size are dug well in advance to the onset of monsoon. The pitsare filled with a
mixture of tank silt, FYM or Compost and soil in equal proportions.To avoid termite
problems dusts like lindane are also mixed in the soil mixture.Guava may be planted from
June to December in South India and June to August in North India.Spacing generally
adopted is 5-6 meters in square system of planting. In highlyfertile soils it may be increased
to 6-8meters.
Flowering and fruiting:
The bloomingperiod varies from 25-45 days depending on the cultivar, season and region.
Theinitial fruit set is quite high and approximately 80% of flowers set fruits. Afterwardsdue
to severe fruit drop only 34 - 56 per cent of fruits reach maturity.
Under natural conditions, guava tree produces flowers and fruits twice in a year
inNorth India, but in South and Western India it is thrice i.e. almost throughout theyear,
which results in no rest period and ultimately guava tree bears small crops atdifferent times of
the year. The pattern of flowering and fruiting periods in guava are:
Ambe-bahar: Guava tree flowers during February-March or spring season.The fruits ripe
from July-September inrainy season. The fruits obtained during this season are insipid,
watery and poor inquality i.e. taste and keeping quality.
Mrig-bahar: Guava produces flowers in June-July or monsoon.The fruits ripe from
November-January in the winter.The fruits obtained during winter are excellent in quality and
therefore, the guavatrees are made to produce the Mrig-baharflowering only.
Hasth-bahar: Guava tree produces flowers in October. The fruits ripe from February-April.
The quality is good, but yield is verylow. However, it fetches good price. This bahar in guava
is not very common. It is mostly a chance crop.
Crop regulation (Bahar Treatment): Throughout India, Mrig-baharis preferred overambe
and Hasth-bahars.Therefore, it become necessary to regulate flowering, so thatMrig-baharcan
produce heavy flowering and fruits are available in winter. Thepractices followed for taking
Mrig-baharare:
Restricting irrigation water: The trees should not be given irrigation from February
tomiddle of May so that the tree sheds its leaves during hot season (April-May)and goes to
rest. During this rest period, tree can conserve food material in itsbranches. In the month of
June tree is well cultivated and manured followed byirrigation. After about 20 -25 days the
tree blaze in to profuse blossoms. The fruitsmature during winter.
Exposing roots: Carefully upper soil around the trunk about 45 - 60 cm radius isremoved so
that the roots are exposed to the sun which results in reduction insupply of soil moisture from
the soil to the top and therefore, the leaves begin toshed and the tree goes to rest. After about
3-4 weeks the exposed roots are againcovered with the soil. Manuring and watering may be
followed.
De-blossoming: It can be done with the use of growth of regulators. Among manychemicals
NAD (Naphthalene acetamide) at 50 ppm is the most effective.De-blossoming can also be
done manually on small scale.When flowers of Ambe-baharare de-blossomed or thinned, the
tree become morepotential to produce more flowers and fruits in Mrig-bahar.
Irrigation: Guava is a hardy plant and generally doesn‘t require much irrigation.But the yield
and quality improve markedly by irrigation in summer. The young guavaplants need
irrigation at weekly interval during summer months and 2-3 irrigationsduring winter months.
For bearing trees irrigations are needed for flowering and better fruitsetting.
Manures and fertilizers:It responds well to the application of inorganic fertilizers along
with organic manures. Therefore for the bearing trees, 50 kg of FYM and one kg in each of
N, P and K are applied per tree in two equal split doses, once during June-july and again
during September-October. The manure and fertilizers are spread in the entire basin of the
tree, 15 cm away from the trunk.
Guava sometimes suffers from deficiency of micronutrients. Hence, a mixed spray
containing ZnSO4, MgSO4, MnSO4 @ 0.5% and CuSO4 and FeSO4 @ 0.25% and a wetting
agent @ 1 ml per 5 lit of solution at various stages viz. new flush, 1 month after first spray, at
flowering and at fruit set are recommended.
Interculture: The orchard should be kept clean by ploughing twice or three once in
thebeginning of monsoon to improve the infiltration of rain water into the soil and the
secondploughing in the middle of the rainy season to control the weeds. The basins should be
kept weed free bydigging occasionally and the basins around the trees should be kept
enlarged as thetrees get older.
Inter cropping: In the early stages of establishment of guava orchard till the
commercialbearing, the interspaces can be utilized by growing suitable intercrops. Vegetable
cropslike bhendi, brinjal, beet root and fruit crop like papaya can be grown as intercrops.
Training and pruning: The main objective of training a guava plant is to provide a strong
framework and scaffold branches suitable for bearing a heavy crop without damaging the
branches. Training guava trees to open centre system is good. Care must be taken to prevent
criss- crossing of the primary branches in the initial years of planting. In case of varieties
having spreading habit, primary branches are allowed at least 75cm above ground level. It is
better to shape the tree canopy to a limited height into a rectangular shape, allowing more
spread in East-West direction.
Dead, diseased, intercrossing branches and suckers coming up from the base and sides
of framework should be pruned back annually. In guava, the flowers and fruits are borne on
current season‘s growth in the axils of leaves arising from the old ones, hence, a light annual
pruning is necessary to encourage new shoots after the harvest. Pruning in guava results in
large fruits of higher value, early flowering. Severe pruning reduce yield largely, light
pruning is always desirable.
Harvesting: Seedling guava trees require 4-5 years to bear, while vegetativelypropagated
plants start bearing from third year after planting. The fruits turn greenishyellow with the
approach of maturity are considered ready for harvesting. Guavafruits mature for harvesting
after 4-5 months of anthesis. The fruits should not be allowed to over ripen on the trees as
theydeteriorate in quality and are more liable to be damaged by birds. Individual fruitsare
picked when they are still hard and firm at regular intervals.
Yield: Seedling tree of guava of 10 yearsold yields about 400-500 fruits whereas, grafted tree
yields 1000-2000 fruits.
Average yield of guava is about 25-30 t/ ha.
Cashew nut
Botanical name: Anacardium occidentale
Family :Anacardiaceae
Introduced into Malabarcoast of South India in 16th century by Portuguese. India
produces 40% of raw nuts and exports 90% of the world produce. Export earnings from
Cashew nut constitute 2% of total earnings from Agricultural commodities. Major cashew
growing states in our country are Kerala, Karnataka,Tamilnadu, Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa and Goa.
Uses:
1. Cashew nut is rich in proteins and vitamins A, B and E.
2. Kernel gives 40% oil.
3. Testa rich in tannins used in leather industry testa with kernel pieces used as poultry feed.
4. Cashew apple is a rich source of Vitamin C (5 times more than Citrus), contain 10-
12% sugars.
5. In Goa,Feni (liquor) is prepared from Cashew apple.
6. Apple is dried and powdered into a meal and used as animal feed.
Climate:
It is a hardy tropical plant. It requires a well distributed annual rainfall of around 500 mm. It
requires 15 to 40 °C temperature. Mean annual temperature should not be less than 20°C. It
is sensitive to cold. If Relative Humidity is less than 10%, leaves scorch and fruits drop
occurs. Proximity to sea is favourable (160 km)
Soil:
Cashew is raised on laterites, red soils and coastal sands. Sandy loam soils having 3 meter
depth are ideal for cashew nut cultivation. The crop cannot stand water logging but can
stand drought. It requires a pH of 6 to 7.5.
Varieties:
BPP 1: It is a selection from a cross between T. No. 1 x T. No. 273.
BPP 2: It is a selection from a cross between T. No. 1 x T. No. 273.
BPP 3: It is a survey collection from Simhachalam.
BPP 4: It is a survey collection from Epurupalem.
BPP 5: It is a clonal selection from Bapatla.
BPP 6: It is a clonal selection from Bapatla.
BPP 8: It is a selection from a cross between T. No. 1 x T. No. 39.
BPP 9: It is a selection from a cross between T. No.56 x M 10/4.
In Maharastra: improved varieties are Vengurla 1,2,3,4 and 5.
In Karnataka: improved varieties are Ullal 1 and 2.
In Kerala: improved varieties are Anakkayam 1, BLA 39-4, K22 -1
Propagation
Seedling propagation: Though it is commonly practiced method of cashew propagation, it
is not encouraged due to high proportion of cross pollination leading to considerable
variability among seedling progenies.
Vegetative propagation: Cashew is vegetatively propagated by different methods.
• Softwood grafting
• Epicotyl grafting
• Air layering
Soft wood grafting
• Among the vegetative propagation methods soft wood grafting is more successful in
most of the cashew growing areas.
• In soft wood grafting 30-40 days old seedlings with 1 to 2 pairs of leaves are retained
on root stocks while grafting. However, usually soft portion of the seedlings at 15 -20
cm from ground level is availed for grafting.
• For grafting 10-12 cm long pencil thick scion from current season’s growth should be
selected.
• Two pairs of bottom leaves are retained on the stock and the stock is decapitated 5cm
above the second pair of leaves and a vertical incision from the top of the stock is
made.
• Scion is inserted into the stock and tied with polythene strip.
• The grafts are kept under shade. The successful graft shows signs of growth within 3-
4 weeks after grafting.
Planting
Pits of 45 x 45 x 45 cm are dug and filled with a mixture of topsoil, 10 kg of farmyard
manure and one kg of neem cake at a distance of 8-10 m and planted during June. In the case
of seedling, 45 days old seedlings are transplanted.
Intercropping
The interspaces may be ploughed after the receipt of the rain and intercrops like
groundnut, pulses, tapioca or rose can be grown till the trees reach their bearing stage.
Training and pruning
All the side shoots must be removed up to a height of at least 2m from the ground to
cause the branches to form and spread out from the upper section of the trunk. Periodical
pruning of dead wood and criss cross branches during the month of July is recommended to
minimize the losses through diseases such as dieback and to increase the yield.
Weeding
Clearing the area by manually within 2 m radius of the trunk is essential. Glyphosate
(post emergent) application at 6 to 7 ml per litre of water (0.8 kg a.i./ ha) during June – July
also effectively controls weeds.
Irrigation
In India cashew is grown mainly under rain fed condition. However protective
irrigation especially during summer months at fortnightly intervals improves fruit set, fruit
retention, thereby increasing nut yield.
Manuring: Application of organic and inorganic manures are essential for higher yield in
cashew.The recommended manurial schedule is as follows
Age of First dose (g/ plant) Second dose (g/ Plant)
Plantation N P K N P K
1st year 0 0 0 0 0 0
2nd year 100 25 25 100 25 25
3rd year 150 40 60 150 40 60
4th year 200 60 60 200 50 60
Nitrogen may also be given trough foliar spraying (urea 1%) during July and
November to get best result.
Harvesting:
Harvesting commence from February on West coast; April on East coast. Fallen
fruits are gathered. After gathering fruits, nuts are to be separated from apples. Nuts sun dried
for 2 to 3 days, stored in gunny bags nuts should not be dried for more than four days,
since they become brittle and break during processing and cause damage to the kernels.
Yield: The crop comes to fruiting in 3-5 years and by 10th year it attains commercial
bearing status. Average yield is 1600 kg/ ha.
Lecture 16
Cultivation of Coconut – intercrops in coconut
Botanical name: Cocos nucifera
Family :Palmae
India ranks 1stin production and 3rd in area after Philippines and Indonesia. Major
coconut growing states in our country are Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and
Karnataka.
Most important source of vegetable oil in the world. Kernel has 65% oil.(Oil palm -
46%). Copra and coconut oil are the traditional products for oils and fats. Provide raw
material for a number of industries. Coconut based industries include coir manufacture, copra
processing, oil milling and distillery. Export of coir and coir goods alone earn Rs. 260 million
foreign exchange. It provides food, drink, oil, fibre, shell and fuel, thatch, beverage, timber
for domestic fuel. Hence called as ‘Kalpavriksha’
Climate:Coconut is a tropical plant. It requires humid warm climate with an average annual
temperature of 27°C with a diurnal variation not exceeding 7°C. It does not grow under
shade. If grown under shade palm become lean and lanky. Annual rainfall of 2000 mm with
even distribution is best for proper growth.
Soil:Adaptable to wide range of soil conditions from light sandy to heavy clays. Sandy
soils are suitable, when there are good sources of ground water. Alluvial, red sandy and silty
loams are also suitable, if they are well drained. Alkaline, saline soils are not suitable. Ideal
pH is 5.2 to 7.0
Varieties:
Varieties are classified into two groups
1. Tallvarieties
2. Dwarfvarieties
Tall varieties: These are extensively cultivated. Talls and dwarfs are crossed to produce
hybrid varieties. Eg: East Coast Tall, West Coast Tall, Laccadevi ordinary, Laccadivi micro
and Andaman ordinary.
Dwarf varieties: Short statured.Dwarfs grown for tender nuts and ornamental palms and
hybrids. Exhibit three nut colours – green, yellow and orange. Eg: Chowghat orange
dwarf, ChowghatGreenDwarf, Malayan Green Dwarf, Malayan Yellow Dwarf, Malayan
Orange Dwarf, Ganga Bondam
Differences between Tall and Dwarf varieties
S. No. Tall Varieties Dwarf Varieties
1 Tall statured (30m) Short statured (5m)
2 Live up to 80 years Live up to 40-50 years
3 Late bearing (8years) Earliness in bearing (3-31/2 years)
4 Have short trunk with a bole Trunks are without a bole
5 Fully developed leaf, measures 6m Fully developed leaf, measures 4m rarely
6 Regular bearers Exhibit alternate bearing habit
7 Allogamous (cross pollinated) Autogamous (self pollinated)
8 Nuts are medium to large; copra, oil Nuts are small, copra is soft and leathery
and fibre are of good quality with low oil content
9 Grown commercially for copra, oil etc Mainly grown for tender fruits and
ornamental purpose
10 Average yield is 60-100 nuts/palm Average yield is 50-60 nuts/palm.
Eg: East Coast Tall, West Coast Tall, Eg: Chowgat Green Dwarf, Chowgat
Laccadive Ordinary, Laccadive Micro Orange Dwarf, Gangabondm.
Hybrids
1. Anantha Ganga: Andaman Ordinary X Ganga Bondam
2. Godavari Ganga: East Coast Tall X Ganga Bondam
3. Kerala Ganga: West Coast Tall X Ganga Bondam
East Coast Tall: The popular cultivar grown extensively on the East coast of Andhra
Pradesh. The palm comes to bearing in 6-8 years after planting. On an average yield 80 to
100 nuts / palm/year. Oil content 64%.
Ganga bondam: This is a dwarf variety and can be grown in a few areas of Kerala, Tamil
Nadu Andhra Pradesh particularly for coconut water. This variety starts bearing from 4th year
onwards. It yields on an average 60 fruits per tree and having oil content of 68%. It is used as
breeding material. To get hybrids this can be used as male parent to cross with tall varieties.
Nursery management:
Selection of seed nut and mother palms:
Coconut is mainly propagated by seeds. Usually seed nuts are harvested from January
to May. Fully matured (12 months old) seed nuts are to be procured and then dried under
shade for 20 to 30 days to minimize the water content and later on sown in the nursery.
The seed nuts have to be collected from healthy mother palms having the following
characteristics.
• The mother palm should attain the age of 20 to 40 years
• The palm should be a regular bearer with higher nut yield [more than 100
nuts/palm/year]
• The palm should have spherical or semi spherical crown with 30-40 leaves on the crown.
• The palm should have short and stout petiole and wide leaf base firmly attached to the
stem.
• The palm should have short and stout inflorescence stalk with bunches
• The size of the nut should be medium with round shape and weighing more than 500g.
• The palm should be free from pests and diseases.
Nursery management: Choose the nursery site in the elevated areas with assured irrigation
and good drainage facility. In heavy soils, raised beds are to be prepared. The seed nuts are to
be sown at a spacing of 45 X 30 X 15 cm. Need based irrigations are to be given to facilitate
good germination. The seed nuts germinate within 2-3 months of sowing with 65-70 percent
germination.
Selection of seedlings:
Seedlings selected at 9-10 months.
1. Early germinated,
2. Healthy and vigorously growing seedlings.
3. With good girth (10-12 cm) at collar region and
4. At least 6-8 opened leaves
5. showing the indication of early splitting are selected.
Selected seedlings are lifted carefully.
Digging and filling pits: Pits of 1 m cube are dug up during summer and left for weathering.
Few weeks before planting pits are filled up to 50 cm depth with top soil mixed with river
sand, wood ash, bone meal, MOP and 50 grams BHC 10 % dust. After filling pits are watered
and allowed to settle.
Spacing: Spacing varies depending on planting system, soil type and variety etc. For tall
varieties and hybrids 8x8 m spacing, for dwarf varieties 7.5x7.5 m spacing is adopted.
Transplanting: Seedlings are transplanted in the pit by scooping out a small hole in the
centre of the pit. Seedlings should be staked and watered. The time of planting is June to July
in the upland areas and October to November in low lying and heavy rainfall areas .
Manuring: Starting from first year onwards apply manures and fertilizers regularly
in coconut for good vegetative growth, early flowering and high yields. Addition of FYM
@ 100kg/ palm and neem cake @ 2 kg/ palm in June-July is recommended. Chemical
fertilizers should be applied in two equal splits, first dose during June-July months and
the second being in October-November months at 2 metres away from the trunk in basin
at 15 cm depth.
Age Urea SSP MOP
In grams/ tree/ year
1st year 250 500 850
2nd year 500 1000 1275
3rd year 750 1500 1825
4th year onwards 1000 2000 2500
In addition, 500 g Mg SO is to be applied. Green manure crops like Sunhemp or
4
cowpea or Diancha @ 100g/palm can be sown with the onset of rains and can be incorporated
in-situ when they come to flowering.
Inter cropping
• Growing intercrops helps in effective utilization of soil, water and sun light.
• Annual intercrops like Turmeric, Zinger, Colacasia, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Beans,
Chillies, Brinjal and Bhendican be grown in young gardens upto 5 to 6 years of age from
planting.
• In old gardens above 20 years perennials like Banana, Cocoa, Pepper, Pineapple, Papaya,
Heliconia, etc. can be cultivated.
Irrigation:
Palm needs large quantities of water for satisfactory performance. Due to
irrigation, production of female flowers and setting percentage increase considerably.
Irrigation is more essential in light soils and areas of low rainfall and long spells.
Common method of irrigation is Basin and flood irrigation; when water is scarce drip
irrigation is to be provided. In rainfed coconuts mulching of basins is required. Surface
mulching with coconut leaves or farm waste and sowing of Green manure crops in the basins
also help in soil moisture retention.
Button shedding
Shedding of buttons and premature nuts in coconut may be due to any one of the
following reasons i.e., Excess acidity or alkalinity, Lack of drainage, Lack of nutrients, Lack
of pollination, Hormone deficiency, Pests and diseases and Genetic causes.
The following remedial measures are suggested for button shedding.
1. Rectification of soil pH: Excess acidity or alkalinity of soil may cause button shedding.
This could be rectified by adding lime or gypsum.
2. Providing adequate drainage facilities: Lack of drainage results in the roots of coconut
trees getting suffocated for want of aeration and shedding of buttons occur under such
condition. Drainage channels have to be dug to drain the excess water during rainy season.
3. Lack of nutrition: Button shedding occurs due to inadequate or lack of manuring. The
recommended dose of manurial schedules and proper time of application are important to
minimise the button shedding.
4. Lack of pollination: Button shedding also occurs due to lack of pollination. Setting up of
beehives @ 15 units/ha may increase the cross pollination in the garden. through honey,
increases the net profit per unit area.
5. Hormone deficiency: Button shedding also occurs due to hormone deficiency. By
spraying 2, 4- D at 30 ppm or NAA 20 ppm (2,4-D 30 mg or NAA 20 mg per litre of water)
on the inflorescence one month after opening of the spathe minimise the button shedding.
6. Pests and Diseases incidence: Button shedding also occurs due to attack of pests and
diseases. To control this, spray monocrotophos @ 1.6ml/L. Spray Blitox 3g/L water 2-3
times during monsoon
7. Genetic causes: In some trees button shedding may persist even after ensuring adequate
manuring, irrigation and crop pest and disease management. This is an indication of inherent
defect of the mother palm from which the seed material was obtained. This underlines the
need for proper choice of superior mother palm for collecting seed coconut to ensure
uniformly good yielding trees.
Harvesting:
Tall varieties start flowering in 5-7 years after planting and Dwarf varieties flower
in 3rd year. Once enters bearing stage, continuously produce flowering. 12 bunches are
expected per year. They take 11-13 months from flowering to maturity. Hallow sound on
tapping, brown colouration of husk are the maturity indices. However coconuts are harvested
at different ages for different purposes are as follows
Tender nuts 6-7 months old
Green husk 10-11months old
Copra and oil 11-12months old
Seed 12 months old
Monthly harvests are made for tender nuts. For copra and oil matured nuts are
harvested at 45 days interval during summer and 60 days interval during rainy season. 8 – 10
harvests are made per year. For seed only one harvest is taken per year.
Yield: Tall variety: 60-80 nuts under rainfed conditions. 80-100 nuts underirrigated
conditions.
Intercropping in Coconut gardens:
Since coconut is perennial in nature, since the market price for coconut is also fluctuates and
to utilize the available interspace and natural resources like water, sunlight cultivation of
intercrops is followed which generates additional income to the farmers and sustains the
income generation.
Generally, Multistoried cropping system is followed for better utilization of sunlight.
Annual crops: in coconut gardens of below five years age there is enough sunlight and air
circulation is available where it is possible to cultivate annual crops such as turmeric, ginger,
yams, cabbage, cauliflower, beans, cucurbits, chilli, brinjal, bhendi, pulses, ground nut are
cultivated.
Perennial crops: in gardens of more than 20 years age perennial crops like banana, coco,
pineapple, papaya, heliconia, pepper are cultivated which gives sustainable income.
In areas of water scarcity, light soils like red sandy soils moisture will remain for limited
period hence short duration crops like beans, maize, groundnut are grown.
Growing of green manure crops i.e., pillipesara, crotalaria, sunhemp enhances soil fertility.
Addition of manures and fertilizers for both the main crop and intercrops as per the
recommendation increases yield of both the crops.
Lecture 17
Importance of vegetable cultivation – nutritional values, importance of
vegetables in human nutrition
The branch of horticulture that deals with the cultivation of vegetables is known as
Olericulture. The word olericulture is derived from the Latin word Oleriswhich means pot
herb and the English word culture which means cultivation. Thus olericulture means
cultivation of pot herbs. However, in the present days, it is broadly used to indicate the
cultivation of vegetables.
The term vegetable is applied to the edible herbaceous plant or plant parts thereof,
which are consumed generally in the unripe stage after cooking.
The balanced diet contains adequate energy source, nutrients and vitamins, minerals,
carbohydrates, fats, protein, etc. Vegetable are the reliable source for many dietary factors.
As vegetables contain many of the dietary factors like vitamins, minerals and amino acids.
According to the ICMR/WHO, daily requirement of vegetables per head are 100 g tubers,
100 g leafy vegetables, 120 g other vegetables. India is the second largest vegetable
producing country after china though our productivity is less as compared to other countries
due to following reasons.
1. Non availability of High yielding varieties.
2. Extension services are limited which are not reaching to the needy farmers.
3. Non availability of systematic market.
4. Lack of storage facilities for vegetables.
Importance of vegetables in human nutrition:
Vegetables produce taste, increase appetite withadequate quantity of fibres. They
maintain good health and protect against degenerative diseases. They can neutralise the acids
produced during digestion of proteins and fats. Fruits and vegetables are recognized as
protective foods as they are the chief sources of vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, fats,
proteins, etc. necessary for the maintenance of human health.
Vegetables rich in Vitamins and Minerals:
Vitamin-A:Deficiency leads to retarded growth in children, formation of stones in kidneys,
creates problem in breathing. Its deficiency causes night blindness.
Source: leafy greens, carrot, cabbage, tomato
Vitamin- B (Thaimine): Deficiency leads to loss of weight, lowers body temperature and
leads to digestion problems, mainly it causes Beriberi disease.
Source: legume seeds such as peas, beans
Vitamin- C (Ascorbic acid): its deficiency leads to scurvy disease and paucity of heart
muscles.
Source: Tomato, palak, menthi, cabbage, greenchillies, spinach, potatoes, peas and beans
and carrot.
Vitamin- D (Calciferol)/ Ricketic vitamin: This vitamin is necessary for building up of
bones, preventing rickets and diseases of teeth.
Source: All green leafy vegetables are rich in vitamin D.
Vitamin- E (Tocopherol): This vitamin is also known as Anti –sterility. It has an important
effect on the generative functions and promotes fertility.
Source: Green lettuce and other green vegetables.
Vitamin- k (Pyridoxin): This vitamin prevents blood clotting
Source: All green leafy vegetables are rich in this vitamin.
Proteins:Proteins are essential for the growth of the body. Deficiency of proteinscauses
retarded growth and increased susceptibility to diseases and causes lethargy.
Source:Peas and beans are rich in proteins.
Carbohydrates: These are essential for supply energy.
Source: Potatoes, Sweet potato.
Minerals: Human body requires minerals like P, Ca, Iron, and Iodine etc. leafy greens are
rich in Ca and Fe.
Lecture 18
Vegetable gardens – kitchen gardens – vegetables gardens according to
purpose/ situations
According to the purpose of vegetables cultivation, vegetable gardens are classified into
two types:
1. Kitchen gardens
2. Vegetable gardens for commercial purpose (these are again classified as five types)
1. Market gardens
2. Transport gardens
3. Vegetable forcing
4. Gardens for processing units
5. Gardens for seed production
Objectives of Kitchen gardens: These vegetable gardens are mainly meant for growing and
supplying of fresh vegetables to meet the daily requirement of the family.
Advantages of kitchen garden:
✓ best means of recreation and exercise.
✓ An excellent hobby and healthy occupation for young and old during their
leisure time.
✓ Cut down the expenditure on purchase of vegetables.
✓ Vegetables grown in kitchen garden are fresh and are free from market
infection.
Kitchen gardens, where vegetable crops are grown in the backyard of a house or any
available space in the home compound by engaging the family members to produce fresh and
nutritionally rich vegetables which are free from pesticide residues as compared to the
vegetables available in outside markets. This type of gardens also gives immense opportunity
to children for learning about vegetable cultivation which creates enthusiasm.
Important points to be considered in laying of kitchen gardens:
1. All the stubbles, stones, broken glass pieces in the site should be removed before
leveling. Addition of 2.5 kg Compost, 50 g Super phosphate, 25 g Ammonium
sulphate, 125 g Potash fertilizers to be done before leveling the land. Urea @ 50 g is
to applied in 2-3 split doses during the entire growth of the crop.
2. An area of 2m x1mis allotted at one corner to prepare raised (15 cm height) nursery
beds for the vegetables like tomato, brinjal, chilli, cabbage, cauliflower. These
seedlings are to be transplanted at 5-6 week age.
3. Perennial trees like banana, lemon, curry leaf, drumstick should be planted in north
direction to avoid shade effect on other vegetables.
4. During summer and rainy season, on three sides of fence cucurbit vegetables like
ridge gourd, bottle gourd, cucumber, snake gourd, bitter gourd to be trained while in
winter season beans to be trained on fourth side.
5. The place along the bund side should be used to grow tuber and root crops (Carrot,
Colacasia, Radish, Beet root).
6. Short duration leafy vegetables like spinach, fenugreek, coriander, lettuce can be
grown in between the rows of long duration vegetables like cabbage, cauliflower etc.
7. Compost pits are prepared on one corner side to dump all the kitchen waste so as to
prepare manure for the kitchen garden.
8. A plan should be prepared well in advance according to the season and the total area
should be divided into small plots so that vegetables can be grown throughout the
year.
9. Generally, rectangular site should be preferred to kitchen gardens.
10. Planting should be done according to their maturity, the early maturing types should
be planted at one side to utilize the place afterwards.
11. Fertilizer application and Irrigation should be given timely and whenever it requires.
12. Always it is necessary to take pure and quality seed or planting material and thus
should match with the growing season.
13. Regular monitoring of pest and disease is necessary to take plant protection.
Commercial vegetable gardens:
1.Market gardens: Market gardens produce vegetables for local markets and theseare
located within 10-20 km from a city. Selection of vegetables to be produced depends on the
demand of local market. A market gardener will like to grow early varieties to catch the early
market. Returns are high in this gardens as intensive method is followed, land and labour cost
is compensated by the availability of city compost, sludge and water.
2. Truck gardens: A truck-garden produces one or two selected crops in a relatively large
quantity for distant markets. It generally follows a more extensive method of cultivation than
the market-garden. The cost of labour and land may cheap and he follows mechanized
method of cultivation, hence his cost of cultivation is less. The net income is also less as this
includes cost of transport and charges of middlemen.
3. Gardens for vegetable forcing: Main aim of these gardens is the production of vegetables
out of the normal season (Off season production). These can be grown in protected structures
by creating suitable environment for the selected crop. Quality of the produce is good and it
fetches high price.
4. Vegetable garden for processing:Vegetable garden for processing develops around the
processing factories and is mainly responsible for supplying vegetables to the factories
regularly. This type of garden grows particular varieties suitable for canning, dehydration or
freezing.These gardens specialized in growing only a few vegetables in bulk.
Ex: Tomato. Potato
5. Vegetable garden for seed production: The main purpose of these gardens is seed
production. The gardener should have a thorough knowledge of a vegetable in respect of its
growth habits, mode of pollination, proper isolation distance, cleaning, threshing, grading etc.
in the production of quality seed. Therefore, it is considered as a special type of garden.
Lecture19
Classification of vegetables based on botany, plant part used as vegetables,
seasons of growing and methods of culture - based on salt tolerance
I. Botanical classification:
All vegetables belong to Divison Angiospermae. The Angiospermae has 2 classes
mono and dicotyledone. They are further divided into families, genus, species, subspecies and
botanical varieties.The grouping of vegetables therefore is as follows
A.Monocotyledonae
1. Amaryllidaceae
Onion – Allium cepa
Garlic – Allium sativum
2. Liliaceae
Asparagus – Asparagus officinalis
3. Araceae
Colocasia esculenta
4. Diascoreaceae
Yam – Amarphophaluscompanulatus
B. Dicotyledonous (vegetables):
1. Chenopodiaceae
Palak – Beta vulgaris
Beetroot -Beta vulgarisbenghalensis
2. Compositae
Lettuce – Lactuca sativum
3. Convolvulaceae
Sweet potato- Ipomea batatus
4. Brassicaceae
Cabbage – Brassica oleracea var. capitata
Cauliflower - Brassica oleracea var. botrytis
Radish – Raphanus sativum
Knolkhol - Brassica oleracea var.caloprara
Turnip – Brassicarapha
5. Cucurbitaceae
Cucumber – Cucumis sativum
Musk melon – Cucumis melo
Water melon- Citrullas lunatus
Ridge gourd- Luffaacutangula
Bottle gourd – Lagenaria cicaranea
Snake gourd – Trichosanthusanguina
Bitter gourd – Momordica charensia
Ash gourd – Benincasahispida
Little finger – Coccinea indica
6. Euphorbiaceae
Tapioca - Manihot esculenta
7. Leguminaceae
Pea - Pisum sativum
French bean - Phaseolus vulgaris
Cluster bean - Cyamopsis tetragonoloba
Gem - Dolichos lablab
Methi - Trigonella foenumgreacum
Cowpea –Vigna ungiculata
8. Malvaceae
Okra – Abelmuscus esculentum
9. Solanaceae
Potato: Solanum tuberosum
Brinjal: Solanum melongena
Tomato: Solanum esculentum
Chilli: Capsicum annum
Pepper: Capsicum fruitescence
10. Umbelliferae (Apiaceae)
Carrot – Dacus carota
11. Rutaceae
Curry leaf - Murrayakoenigii
12. Labiatae
Mint – Mentha arvensis
13. Moringaceae
Drum stick – Moringa oleifera
II. Classification based on plant parts used: According to parts used for consumption
1. Leafy vegetables: Amaranthus, Fenugreek and Palak
2. Fruits: Tomato, Brinjal, Bhendi, Peas, Beans, Cucurbits
3. Flower parts: Cauliflower
4. Under ground parts:
a) Stem tubers:Potato and Colocasia
b) Root tubers: Carrot, Sweet potato and Tapioca
c) Bulbs: Onion and garlic
The cultural requirements of crops in each group are not same i.e tomato, bhendi and
cucurbits.
III. Classification based on season of growing:
1. Kharif season –June to September – Cucurbits, Brinjal, Okra
2. Rabi season - October to January – Cabbage, Cauliflower, Beet, Peas, Tomato
3. Summerseason – February to May – Brinjal, Chilli, Cluster beans, Bottle gourd
IV. Classification based on method of cultivation:
This is a very convenient method where, all the crops with similar cultural
requirements are grouped together. Therefore, it is possible to recommend general cultural
practices for all vegetables, which are grouped together. Some groups like cucurbits, cold
crops, bulb crops are not only have similar cultural requirements for the group but the crops
in each group belong to same family. The groups like greens, salad crops, bulb crops, the
parts edible in each group are also same.
Therefore, this system of classification has been found to be more satisfactory in
understanding the principles of vegetable growing than any other methods.
Perennial vegetables – Drum stick, Ivy gourd
Leafy vegetables – Amaranthus, Spinach
Cole crops – Cabbage, Cauliflower
Root crops – Carrot, Radish, sweet potato
Bulb crops – Onion, Garlic
Cucurbits – Cucumber, Ridge gourd, Water melon, bitter gourd
Solanaceous vegetables – Brinjal, Tomato, Chilli
Legume crops- Beans, Cluster bean
Tuber crops – Colocasia. Yam, Potato
V. Classification based on tolerance to Salts level in soil
1. Low tolerance – Peas, Beans, Brinjal
2. Medium tolerance – Onion, Carrot, Cabbage
3. High Tolerance – Bitter gourd, Ash Gourd
VI.Classification based on pH
1. Low tolerance (pH 6.8 – 6.0) – Cabbage, Cauliflower, Onion
2. Medium tolerance (pH 6.8 – 5.5) – Peas, Chilli, Carrot, Brinjal
3. High Tolerance (pH 6.8 – 5.0) – Potato, Sweet potato
Lecture 20
Vegetable nurseries- seed treatment –management of raised nursery beds
Raising of vegetable seedlings play crucial role in the production of vegetables which
accounts for half of the profits. In developed countries, seedling production is taken up by
private companies. In recent years, quality seedling production is also gaining importance
among farming community to utilize the raised beds and protray nurseries on commercial
scale.
Crops like cucurbits, beans, French beans, bhendi, cluster bean, drum stick which
have bold seed can be sown directly. Whereas, in small seeded crops like tomato, brinjal,
cabbage, cauliflower, chilli, onion seedlings to be raised and transplanted in the main field.
Raising of vegetable nursery:
The land should get ample sunlight, aeration and near to irrigation source. It should be
ploughed 3-4 times to bring to fine tilth. 4 m length, 1 m width and 15 cm raised beds of 10
are sufficient to supply seedlings per one acre. Water stagnation and damping off of seedlings
can be prevented in raised beds.
During hot summer season, covering the beds with white polythene mulch for about
15 days kills fungal spores. Well decomposed Farm yard manure @ 40 kg is and 2 kg
Azospirillum or Azatobacter is applied per 40 m2 beds. Before sowing of seeds, beds should
be drenched with 1% Bordeaux mixture or 3 g Copper oxy Chloride. Seeds to be sown in 10
cm apart and 1-2 cm deep, thin sowing facilitate air circulation and healthy growth of the
seedlings. Watering is to be provided with rose cans regularly, beds should be covered with
paddy straw to protect from heavy rains during rainy season. After sprouting, straw should be
removed. Weeds should be removed regularly. 15 days after sprouting, Furadon 3G granules
@ 100 g is mixed with fine sand and applied in the beds. malathion or dimethoate 2 ml + 3 g
mancozeb is sprayed to control sucking pests and leaf spots. If any damping off is noticed,
drenching with COC @ 3 g per litre is to be done. Withholding of water is to done at least
one week before transplanting. Light watering is given 6-12 hours before pulling of
seedlings. To avoid pests and diseases incidence in main field, dipping of seedlings for about
20-80 min in 20 ml Dimethoate + 10 g Carbedazinm in 10 litrewater to be practiced. Once
the seedlings attain 4-5 weeks age, 8-10 cm height and 2-3 leaves are transplanted in main
field.
Seed treatment:Incidence of seed borne pathogens can be minimized by treating the seed
with insecticide or fungicide is necessary before sowing. Black rot in Cruciferous vegetables
and Phomopsis blight in brinjal can be controlled by soaking seed in hot water (500c) for
about 30 minutes thereafter seeds are shade dried. In chilli, seeds are treated with Trisodium
orthophosphate @ 150 g per litre of water for 30 min thereafter remove the seeds and
washed with fresh water and shade dried to control the virus infestation. For the control of the
sucking pests, seed treatment with Imidachloprid @ 8 g per kg of seed should be done
followed by treatment with Captan or Thiram 3 g per litre to control seed borne pathogens. In
crops like bhendi, tomato, beans, bottle gourd, ridge gourd, snake gourd seeds are treated
with Imidachloprid @ 5 g per kg of seed followed by Captan or Thiram 3 g per seed before
sowing. Seed treatment with Trichoderma viridae @ 4-5 g per kg seed prior to sowingis
necessary to control soil borne diseases.
Management of raised nursery beds:
• Avoid water stagnation in the selected site.
• pH of the soil is 6.5.
• Land should be ploughed 4-5 times and remove all the weeds, stubbles, dried roots
etc.
• To supply seedlings per one hectare, an area of 10 m x 15 m is sufficient to grow
nursery. Raised beds of 15 cm height, 9 m length and 1 width are prepared. In
between nursery beds a furrow or channel with 30 cm width and 10 cm depth should
be made to drain out excess water during rainy season.
• 15 kg of well decomposed farm yard manure 100 g of nitrogen, phosphorous and
potassium fertilizers are to be supplied to each bed.
• 100 g neem cake is mixed with 5 g Tricodermaviride powder for a square meter of
nursery bed.
• Nursery beds are drenched with 3 g Copper oxy chloride( COC) per litre water to
avoid damping off disease.
• Seeds should be sown in 5-8 cm apart in 1 cm depth.
• Mulching with paddy straw helps in generation of heat facilitates for hasten up the
germination and also prevents the seeds from eating away from ants.
• To protect the young seedlings from sucking pests spraying of Imidachloprid 0.2 ml
per litre of water after 7-10 days of emergence seeds should be done.
• Withholding of watering prior to transplanting will harden up the seedlings.
• To protect the beds from sucking pests it should be provided with 40 or 50 mesh
nylon nets.
• 2-3 days before pulling of the seedlings beds seedlings are to be sprayed with 2 ml
Dimethoate + Carbedazim to protect from pest and disease for a month in the main
field. (or) it can also be done that the seedlings are to be dipped for about 20 minutes
in the same solution before transplanting.
• seedlings are ready for transplanting in about 25-42 days based on the crop and
variety.
Use of nylon net: Healthy seedlings are essentialto get good quality as well as higher
yield. During the initial growth, pests and disease incidence results in poor quality and
reduced yields. It is necessary to use nylon nets of 40 or 50 mesh and these are
supported with bamboo or GI pipesto protect the young seedlings. An area of 150
sq.m is needed to grow seedlings required per one hectare which costs around Rs.
5000/-.
Solarization: If the nursery beds are exposed to direct sunlight, insect pupae, soil
pathogens can be killed. The beds are sun dried and covered with polythene sheet
which kills the pathogens and also reduces the weed growth.
Solarization is done by following ways:
• Nurserysoilis mixed with well decomposed farm yard manure.
• Nursery beds are drenched with water then covered with 200 gauge polythene
sheet.
• This has to be kept for about 30-40 days to raise the temperature of 520C
during summer.
• Care should be taken that the polythene sheet should not be damaged/tare.
Lecture 21
Cultivation of important vegetables - Tomato- varieties- soil –climate
Tomato
Scientific name: Solanum lycoprsicon
Family: Solanaceae
Tomato is the world's largest vegetable crop after potato and sweet potato and one of
the most important protective foods. The fruits are rich in vitamin C, vitamin B, vitamin A.
Both the matured as well as ripened fruits are used. Various bye products like pickles, sauce,
ketchup, soups are made out of fruits.
Climate:Tomato can be cultivated throughout the year though the good yields can be
obtained during winter. It is susceptible to high as well as low temperatures (>380C and < 10
0C) which adversely affect the fruiting yield and quality. Maximum fruit set occurs at a night
temperature of 15 to 200 C. At ripen stage, fruits develop a red pigment called Lycopene,
which is inhibited at high temperature.
Soil: Tomato can be grown in a wide range of soils from sandy to heavy soils. A well-
drained, fairly fertile loam with fair moisture holding capacity is ideal for growing a good
crop of tomato. Tomato is highly susceptible to water logging. Well drained soils are highly
necessary. The preferable pH range is 6 to 7.
Varieties:
S.No. Variety Duration (Days) Characteristics Yield (t/a)
1 Pusa Ruby 130-135 Medium sized fruits with deep 12
ridges
2 Pusa Early Dwarf 120-130 Light red coloured fruits. Fruit 12
size is bigger than Pusa Ruby.
Suitable for rainy season &
early summer planting.
3 Marutham 135-140 Round fruits with medium 12-14
size. Suitable for summer.
4 ArkaMeghali 130 Suitable for rain fed crop. 7-8
5 Arka Sourav 105-110 Round and big sized fruits 14
weight about 70 g. suitable for
processing and as vegetable.
6 Arka Vikas 105-110 Round frits weight about 80- 14-16
85 g, round and flat. Suitable
for summer cultivation. used
as fresh vegetable.
Varieties suitable for different seasons:
Rainy season: Pusa Early Dwarf – Early Kharif
Pusa Ruby, Arka Vikas – Late Kharif
Winter season: Pusa Ruby, ArkaSourab, Pusa Early Dwarf
Summer: Marutham, Arka Vikas, Annapurna P-1, PKM -1
Hybrids: Vaishali, Rupali, Rashmi, Magala, Nahin, Avinash -2, Rajini, Annapurna, MTH-
1,2,6
Sowing: In South India, tomato can be grown throughout the year.
Season Time of sowing Time of transplanting
Kharif June-July July –August
Rabi October- November November -December
Summer January -February February - March
Seed Rate: Local varieties: 200 g/ac
Hybrids: 60-80 g/ac
Before sowing seed is treated with 3 g thiram for 1 kg seed followed 4 g Trichoderma viride .
Spacing:
Kharif – 60 cm x 45 cm
Rabi – 60 cm x 60 cm
Summer – 45 cm x 30 cm
Nursery practices:Raised nursery beds of 4m length, 1 m width and 15 cm highare prepared
by fine tilth soil. There should be 50 cm gap in between the beds to avoid water stagnation.
Around 10 beds are sufficient per acre. Well decomposed FYM @40 kg and 4 kg SSP is to be
mixed during last plough. Beds should be drenched with COC 3 g /l before sowing. Before
sowing seeds are soaked in hot water (600C) for 5-15 min then shade dried then seeds are
sown 10 cm apart in lines at a depth of 1-2 cm. Light watering is given with rose can.
Lecture 22
Tomato - manures and fertilizers- water management –inter
cultivation- deficiencies- pest and diseases – plant protection –
harvest – yield
Manures &Fertilizers: Well decomposed Farm Yard Manure of 6-8 ton per acre is applied
along with 24 kg each of Phosphorous and Potash and incorporated into soil. Nitrogen @ 48-
60kg is applied in 3 split doses at 30 days, 45 days and 60 days after transplanting. Incase of
hybrids additional 50 % above fertilizers are applied.
Micro nutrients like B, Zn also need to be applied @ 8-12 kg borax, 10 kg ZnsSO
4/
acre.Availability of Boran is considered to be essential for production of large size fruit with
high vitamin content and prevent fruit cracking, while Zinc for higher ascorbic acid content
and tolerance to diseases.
Irrigation:
Tomato is a deep rooted crop. Roots will grow to a depth of 120 to 150 cm and it has
some drought tolerance. They require adequate moisture for their fair growth. Excess as well
as insufficient moisture is harmful. First irrigation is given immediately after transplanting
thereafter light irrigation should be given at 3 to 4 days interval in summer 10 to 15 day
interval in winter.
Weeding:Pendimethalin 1.25 ml or alachlor 1 l (light soils), 1.25 l (heavy soils) or
Metribuzen 300 g per 200 l of water is sprayed on the entire ground to suppress weed growth.
The same dose of Metribuzen is again sprayed after 15 days of first spraying.
Intercultural operations:
Tomato is subjected to pinching, the lateral shoots are pinched to improve more bushy
growth but little foliage is to be kept. Frequent shallow hoeings are necessary to improve the
yield it also reduce the weed growth. Mulching should be done 15 to 20 days after planting.
Staking is very essential for indeterminate group of varieties because it improves yield and
quality of fruits.
Harvesting:
Harvesting isdepends upon the purpose for which they are used and the distance of
transportation. In general, it commences flowering after 65-70 days after planting. Fruits are
ready in about 45-60 days after flowering. Fruits at green stage are suitable for distant market
while red are suitable for local market and fully ripened will be sent to processing industries.
Yield: Rabi – 12-16 t /ac
Summer 8-12 t /ac
Storage: Tomatoes can be stored for 20 days at 12-15 0C whereas, fully ripened are stored for
10 days at 4.5 0C.
Lecture 23
Cultivation practices of Brinjal
Botanical name: Solanummelongena
Family: Solanaceae
Brinjal is one of the oldest cultivated vegetables in India. It is rich in minerals is Ca,
Mg, P, K and Fe. It is a good source of Vitamin A and C. Bitterness in Brinjal is due to
presence of glycoalkaloids.
Climate:Brinjal is the warm season crop. It is susceptible to severe frost. It requires a long
warm season, before fruit maturity. Optimum temperature is 22 to 330C. Under very cool
seasonal conditions, the ovaries are split leading to the development of abnormal fruits.
Soil: Brinjal can be grown on a wide range of soils. The ideal soils should be a deep, fertile
and well drained. The pH should be not more than 5.5 to 6.5 for better growth and
development. Light soils are good for a healthy crop but heavy soils are suited for higher
yields.
Varieties: Brinjal varieties are grouped on the basis of colour and shape of fruit.
1.Purple and long fruited varieties:Pusa hybrid -5
2.Purple and round fruited varieties: ArkaNavaneeth, Uthkarsha
3.Green and longfruited varieties: Green Long, Harshita, Harita
4.Green and round fruited varieties: Mahyco hybrid -56, Green Bunch
5.Purple striped varieties: Apsara, Kalpataru
Among the cultivated varieties, around 15-20 % area is occupied by hybrids.
Following are some of the cultivated varieties.
S.No. variety Duration character Yield
(Days) (t/ha)
1 Bhagyamathi 150-165 Tolerates drought, fruit and shoot borer 12-14
and little leaf. Suitable for coastal Andhra
Pradesh
2 Shyamala 130-150 Suitable for spicy culinary purpose. 6.-8
Suitable for cultivation in Telangana area.
3 Gulabi 140-160 Medium sized fruits of 3-4 in clusters with 13-14
light rose colour. Suitable for Telangana
as well as coastal Andhra pradesh
4 Pusa Purple Cluster 135-140 Fruits are purple in colour bears in 12-16
clusters. Shows Tolerance to wilt disease.
5 Pusa Purple Long 135-140 Fruits are long and purple in colour. 12-16
PusaKranthi, ArkaKusumakar, ArkaSheel are also in cultivation.
Sowing time: Brinjal is cultivated throughout the year.
Rainy season June-July
Winter season October- November
Summer season February -March
Seed rate and Spacing: Seed requirementfor varieties is 260 g and for hybrids is 124 g per
acre. Seeds should be sown in nursery beds 30-35 days before transplanting. Seedlings of 3-4
leaf stage are transplanted in main field by adopting a spacing of 75 cm x 50 cm (bushy
types) and 50 cm x 50 cm (tall types).
Fertilizers: Well decomposed farm yard manure of 8-10 ton is to be added at the time of last
plough. NPK fertilizers at a ratio of 40-24-24 kg are recommended for successful crop.
Among these 24 kg of Phosphorous and Potash fertilizers are applied at the time of last
plough. Nitrogen is applied in 3 spilt doses at 30, 60, 75 days after transplanting. Hybrids
require additional 50 % of above fertilizers.
Intercultivation: Generally, manual weeding is done to remove weeds. Shallow cultivation
is followed to put down the weed growth. Weeds can be controlled by applying herbicides
like Fluchloralin @ 1.5 kg a.i. / ha. Earthing up gives good yield.
Irrigation: Brinjal is a shallow rooted crop it needs frequent irrigation. The crop is irrigated
at 3 to 4 day interval during summer season 12 to 15 days during winter season. However,
during rainy spells irrigation is not needed. Brinjal is generally irrigated by furrow system of
irrigation.
Harvest: Fruits are harvested when they attain good size and when thesurface is bright and
glossy appearance.First picking starts after 50-60 days after transplanting and subsequent
harvests are in 3-4 days intervals.
Yield: Fruit yield: Rainy and winter season 8-14 t/ac
Summer season 4-7 t/ac
Seed yield: 100-200 kg/ha
Storage: fruits can be stored at room temperature in winter for 3-4 days and in summer for 1-
2 days. At a temperature of 7-10 0C and Relative Humidity of 85-90% fruits can be stored for
about 10 days.
Lecture 24
Cultivation practies of Bhendi
Botanical Name: Abelomoschusescuentum
Family: Malvaceae
Bhendi is grown in tropical to subtropical regions. Fresh fruits have good market in
Gulf countries.
Uses: Fresh fruits are used for various preparations. Fruits are used to make fry, boiled and in
soups. Nutritionally, it is rich in Vitamin A, B, C. it contains higher amounts of Iodine which
is used for the treatment of goiter disease. Juice extracted out of roots and stem is used for
clearing of jaggery and sugar in sugar industries. Dehydrated bhendi is used to serve for
people lives in hilly areas.
Climate: Bhendi is a tropical crop which needs a day and night temperatures of 25-400C and
220C for its good growth. Low temperatures leads to poor growth. Rainy and summer seasons
are congenial for its cultivation.
Soil: Sandy soils and black soils with good drainage facility are suitable its cultivation. The
crop also comes up well with good yield in fertile loamy soils. Suitable soil pH is 6.0 -6.8.
Varieties:
S. No. Variety Characters Yield (t/a)
1 Pusasawani Upright growth habit without side shoots. Fruits are 15- 5.5-6.0
20 cm long. Susceptible to yellow vein mosaic virus.
2 ParbhaniKranthi Grows upright without side shoots. Leaves are dark green 6.0-7.0
in colour. Fruits are 8-9 cm long. Shows tolerance to
yellow vein mosaic virus.
3 ArkaAnamika Starts fruiting 55 days after sowing. Moderately tolerant 7.0-8.0
to yellow vein mosaic virus. Fruits are medium sized
with dark green.
4 ArkaAbhaya Similar toArkaAnamika and resistant to yellow vein 7.0-8.0
mosaic virus.
Hybrids: Varsha, Vijay, Vishal, Supriya, Priya, Mahyco hybrid No. 6,7,8,10, Aishwarya,
Mistik
Suitable varieties for Export: Punjab Padmini, Vardhu Vishal, Nathshobha, Janardhan.
Tender fruits are green colour with 6-8 cm long suitable for export.
Sowing time:Kharif: June-July
Summer: February – March
Seed rate:Kharif - 4-6 kg/ac
Summer – 7-9 kg/ac
Seeds should be treated with 5 g Imidachloprid then with 4 g Trichoderma viridae per 1 kg of
seed. Land should be ploughed for 4-5 times to get fine tilth. For rainy season crop ridges are
laid in 60 cm distance and seeds are sown in 20-30 cm distance on ridges. Summer crop is
sown in strips at a spacing of 45 cm x 15-20 cm.
Spacing:Kharif – 60 cm x 20-30 cm
Summer 45 cm x 15-20 cm
Manures and Fertilizers: 6-8 t of well decomposed farm yard manure (FYM) is applied at
the time of last plough and is incorporated in soil. In addition, 20 kg each of phosphorous and
potash fertilizers are also to be applied during last plough. 45 kg of Nitrogenous fertilizers are
apploied in three split doses. Of the total nitrogen 1/3 rd is applied during last plough and the
remaining 2/3 rd is applied at 30 and 45 days after sowing.
Intercultivation: Regular weeding is to be taken up. Urea @ 10 g/l of water is sprayed
during flowering time increases yield and also saves nitrogen by 20-25%. Micronutrient
application @ 5g/l also increases the yield.
Irrigation: irrigation is given at 5-6 days intervals in summer and in rainy season irrigation is
to be given based on the soil moisture availability.
Harvest: First picking is ready in 45-50 days after sowing. Tender fruits harvested after 4-6
days of fruit set have good quality. Fruits should be picked in 2-3 days intervals.
Yield:Kharif: 3-4 t/a
Summer: 2 -2.5 t/a
Seed production: Isolation distance of 40 m is to be maintained for seed production. Seeds
are separated from the matured fruits. Seed yield of 1-2 to can be obtained from 10-20 q of
fruits.
Lecture -25
Beans – Cultivation practices
All the beans and peas are belong to the family, Leguminaceae.
Characteristics of Leguminaceae family:
1. Plant habit is bush to pole nature. Susceptible to frost except garden pea which prefers cool
climate.
2. Beans prefer warm climate.
3. All the plants are annuals except Dolichus which is perennial.
4. Plants of this family fix atmospheric nitrogen in root nodules with the help of Rhizobium
bacteria.
5. All the crops in this family are self -pollinated types. Fruits are called as pods.
6. Nutritionally these are rich in protein. Also contains vitamin A, C, minerals like Ca, Fe, P.
Vegetables belong to Leguminaceae:
Beans – Dolichous lablab
French bean – Phaseolus vulgaris
Cluster bean – Cyamopsis tetragonoloba
Cowpea – Vigna unguculata
Lima bean – Phaseolus lunatus
Peas – Pisum sativum
Cultivation practices of beans:
Botanical name: Dolichus lablab
Tender pods are used as fresh vegetable and the dried seeds are used as pulse. It prefers warm
climate. Climber types are suitable for cultivation during Kharif season while bush types can
be cultivated both in summer as well as in Kharif season.
Soil: All type of soils are suitable for its cultivation with a pH 6.5 -8.5.
Varieties:
Pole types: Pusa Early Prolific, Depalival, Pusa Sem -2, Pusa Sem – 3.
1. RND -1: it is a Pole type with high yield. Commences to flowering 130-150 days after
sowing. Pods are 15-20 cm long and bear in clusters. Crop duration is 210-240 days
and yields 15-18 t/a.
Bush types:
1. Arka Jaya: Pods are ready in 50-60 days after sowing.
Seed rate: bush types – 16 kg/ac
Bush types – 1.5 -2 kg/ac
Time of sowing: Pole types are sown during second fortnight of June- end of July, bush
types are sown in Kharif during June-July, in Rabi during September – October and in
Summer during January –February.
Spacing: Pole types - 1.5 -2 m.
Bush types – Kharif – 60 cm x 30 cm
Summer – 45 cm x 15 cm
Seed should be treated with Rhizobium culture @ 200 g per one kg of seed. 2-3 seeds are
sown at a depth of 5 cm. after germination weak seedling is removed to retain one healthy
plant.
Fertilizers: At the time of last plough, 8-10 ton of Farm Yard Manure is applied one week
before commencement of sowing. NPK fertilizers in a ratio of 30- 24-12 kg per acre are
supplied. Among these fertilizers entire P, K and half of N are applied at the time last plough
and the remaining half N is applied 30 days after sowing. Irrigation is given immediately
after fertilizer application.
Intercultural operations: Regular weeding is done. Shallow cultivation is to be done at
early stages of crop growth. Earthing up around the base of the plant gives additional support
and encourages root growth.
Climbing varieties need supported of bamboo sticks. Single stick is fixed near each
plant.In pole types, once the tendrils are formed these are tied with a rope and trained to a
frame work consists of line of pairs of caves.
Irrigation: irrigation is given once in 7-10 days. Flowering and pod development stages are
critical for moisture stress.
Harvest: Pods are harvested at tender stage. Pods take 2-3 weeks after flowering.
Yield: Pod yield: 3.6 – 4 t/ac
Seed yield: 0.6-0.8 t/ac
Seed production: Maintain isolation distance of 50 m from other varieties for seed
production. Pods are harvested after maturing and pod colour turns to yellow and pods are
harvested to separate the seeds.
Lecture 26
French Bean and Cowpea– cultivation practices
Botanical name: Phaseolus vulgaris
Family :Leguminaseae
French bean is one of the important legumes grown in winter season. Tender pods are
used mainly in Biryani and cooked as a vegetable. Seeds are separated from the matured pods
and used as other pulses in culinary preparations. Dried seeds of French bean are called as
Rajma.
Climate: French bean is a cool season crop. It gives good yield under mild warm season. It
is sensitive to frost. Optimum temperature required for good growth is 15-210C. In our state,
it is mainly grown during winter season.
Soil:Sandy loams are best for its cultivation. Heavy soil gives good yield. Ideal pH range is
between 6 to 7. French bean mature early on sandy soils compared to other soils.
Varities:
1. Arkakomal:Plant is bushy. Early type. Yields 4.0-4.8t/ac.
2. Bountiful:Introduction from US comes up in September to February. It is resistant to
common diseases. Comes to first picking 70 days after sowing.
3. Contender:Tolerant to powdery mildew and mosaic. Bushy type and pods are ready
in 50-55 days after sowing. Yield is 3.2 -3.8 t/ac.
4. Pusaparvathi:Developed by X ray radiation of American variety. tolerant to
powdery mildew and mosaic. Early type. Pickings can be started 45-55 days after
sowing. Yield 3.2 -3.3 t/ac.
5. Premeir: Early type. Resistant to wilt and mosaic virus. Suitable for Rajma. Yields
around 3.0-3.6 t/ac.
Pole types: T.K.D -1, K.K.L-1. These are long duration of 90-100 days. Yield around
2.0-2.4 t/ac.
Time of sowing: It is a cool loving crop. Sowing can betaken in the months of October –
January. In hills, it is sown during February –March, delayed sowing results in reduced
yields.
Seed rate: 20-24 kg/ac.
Land preparation: 4-5 ploughings are required to get fine tilth. Ridges are made 30-50 cm
apart and seeds are sown at a distance of 25-30 cm on the ridge.
Fertilizers: It has poor nodule formation capability, well decomposed FYM up to a dosage of
8 to 10 t/ a is given, besides that 8 kg N, 20 kg P and K are applied per acre. Nitrogen is
applied in two splits. Half nitrogen first split is given at the time of sowing whole quantity of
P and K. Second split is given at flowering stage.
Intercultural operations:Alachlor @ 800 g or Pendimethalin 1.2 l in 200 l of water as can
be applied as pre-emergent weedicide. Dwarf varieties do not need support. Climbing
varieties need to be supported with bamboo sticks. Single stick is fixed near each plant. The
frame work consists of line of pairs of caves not less than 42 cm apart at ground level.
Earthing up around the base of the plant gives additional support and encourages root growth.
Irrigation: French bean is said to be a drought resistant crop. For better growth and yield
proper supply of moisture is essential. Irrigation is required in the early phases of crop growth
during blooming and pod development period. Irrigation at regular intervals of 7-10 days is
necessary.
Harvesting: Tender pods are harvested for vegetable purpose, pods are ready in 2-3 weeks
after first bloom. Matured pods which are dried are harvested for seed purpose.
Yield: Bush type - 3.6-4 t/a
Pole type – 4.8 -6.0 t/a
Seed production: Minimum isolation distance of 50 m is maintained. Seeds are separated
from the pods when it turns to yellow colour.
Lecture -27
Chilli and Capsicum –cultivation practices
Chilli
Botanical name: Capsicum fruitiscens– Bell pepper
Capsicum annum -Chilli
Family :Solanaceae
Chilli is also called as Pepper. Green chillies are rich in proteins, Ca, Mg, P, K, Cu
and S. vitamins like Thiamine, Riboflavin and Vitamin C. Pungency of chillies is due to
capsaicin. The pigment (colour) in chillies is due to capsanthin also contains many other
oleoresins.
Climate:Chilli is grown in both tropical and sub-tropical areas. It requires warm humid
climatefor vegetative growth while, it requires warm dry weather for fruit maturity. It needs a
well distributed annual rainfall of about 800 – 1200 mm. Heavy rainfall leads to poor fruit set
and high humidity leads to fruit rot. The crops continue to develop at high temperature but
root development is retarded at a temperature of 300 C. Fruit development is adversely
retarded at 380 C. Average night temperature favours high capsaicin content.
Soil:Chilli can be grown on a wide variety of soils provided. For rainfed crop, black soils and
for irrigated crop black soils, chalka soils, sandy loam soils are ideal. Strongly acid soils and
alkaline soils are not suitable.
Land preparation: It needs fine tilth. To bring fine tilth land should be ploughed 3-4 times
followed by 2 harrowings.
Seed rate: Transplanted crop – 650 g per cent
Broadcasting - 2.5 kg per acre.
Seed treatment: At first seeds are treated with 150 g Trisodium orthophosphate to prevent
viruses followed by 8 g Imidachloprid against sucking pest and finally treated with fungicides
like Capton 2 to 3 g per litre used to prevent seed borne diseases.
Nursery management: nursery beds of 4 m length, 1 m width and 15 cm height are
prepared. 30 cm channel is provided in between the beds. Beds are drenched with 1%
Bordeaux mixture or 3 g COC on 9th and 13th day of sowing. Seedlings are ready for
transplanting in 6 weeks.
Varietites:
G-3: long fruited type. Suitable for rainfed crop.
G-4 (Bhagyalaxmi): fruits are long. Used for both green and red chilli purpose. Tolerant to
virus. Yield 40-45 q/acre.
G-5 (Andhrajyothi): fruits are short called gundu types. Yield 40-50 q/acre.
C.A.960 (Sindhur): Fruits alr long and thick. Suitable for green and red chilli purpose under
irrigated crop. Early fruiting with less pungent mainly suitable for summer crop.
L.C.A. -200 (Kiran): Long fruited type. Suitable for Telangana under irrigated conditions+.
Yields 40-45 q /a.
C.A. 1068 (Aparna): fruits are stout and long serves for dual purpose. Yields 35-40 q/ha.
Paprika types: Fruits are long, thick and less pungent and bright coloured. These are used
mainly for pickles, salads and for oleoresin preparations and have good demand in European
markets.
Time of Sowing: Kharif – July to August
Rabi – October to November
Transplanting: Six weeks oldseedlings are suitablefor transplanting. Seedlings are
transplanted at 60 cm x 15 cm for rainfed crop. Under irrigated crop seedlings are
transplanted with a spacing of 60 cm x 60 cm or 75 cm x 60 cm or 90 cm x 60 cm.
Weed management: Fluchloralin 45 % @ 1 litre per acre or pendimethalin 1.3 -1.6 litre or
Oxyflourofin 23.5 % 200 ml any of the above weedicides are sprayed 1 or 2 days prior to
transplanting.
Fertilizers: FYM @ 10 ton per acre is applied at the time of last plough. A fertilizer dose of
60-40-50 kg NPK per ha are applied for rainfed crop and for irrigated crop 300-60-120 kg/ha
NPK are applied.
Harvesting: Fruits are harvested at correct stage of maturity to get maximum yield and dried
on cement floor. 3-4 pickings can be taken from rainfed crop and 6-8 pickings are obtained
from irrigated crop.
Capsicum
Bell pepper is also called as Simlamirchi which contains vitamin A and C. It is
mainly used as salad due to its non-pungent nature.
Climate:Night temperature is crucial for its successful cultivation. Raise in night temperature
affects flowering and results in flower drop and reduces fruit quality. Night temperature of
10-17 0C for 30-40 days is congenial for its cultivation.
Soil: Sandyloamy soils with good drainage are suitable for its cultivation though saline soils
are not suitable.
Seed rate and nursery: 250 g seed is sown in an area of 25 m2. Seed is to be treated with 3 g
Thiram or Mancozeb. Nurserybeds are applied with Carbofuran granules and drenching the
nursery beds with copper based fungicides on 12th and 19th day to reduce the incidence of
damping off.
Varieties:
Variety/hybrid Characteristics Crop duration (days) Yield
(t/ac)
California wonder Fruits are dark green in colour. 140-150 6-7
ArkaBasanth Fruits are light yellow in colour. 125-140 6-8
Arka Gaurav Tender fruits are dark green in colour 120 6-8
and matured fruits are orange colour
with big size (fruit weight 180-200g).
Suitable for kharif and rabi.
Bharath (Hybrid) Fruits are dark green in colour. - 14-16
Time of sowingand Transplanting: September to last week of October. Seedlings of 35-40
days old are transplanted with a spacing of 60 cm x 45 cm.
Fertilizers: Organic manures are applied at the time of last plough @10 t /acre of FYM along
with this addition of neem cake (2 q/ac) gives good yield. basal application of 24 kg
phosphorous, 12 kg potash is applied before transplanting. After 45 days of transplanting 8 kg
nitrogen+ 4 kg potash fertilizers are applied at 15 days intervals in 3 split doses. 1% urea is
sprayed along with insecticides for better yields. To correct Zn deficiency ZnSO @ 20 kg/ac
4
or ZnSO @ 2% per litreis sprayed.
4
Weed Management: Pendimethalin @ 1.25 l or Alachlor @ 1 l (Light soils) or 1.25@ l
(heavy soils) is sprayed within 48 hours of transplanting. Naphthaline Acetic Acid (NAA) @
or Tricontanol @ 20 ml is sprayed twice at flowering stage at 10 days interval to reduce
flower drop.
Irrigation:Irrigation is given for every 10-12 days interval and too much irrigation is not
required.
Harvest: Fruits are harvestedfrom 135 days after planting and continued till 150 dayswhich
yields 6-8 t per acre.
Integrated Pest Management in Chilli and Bell Pepper:
1. Regular weeding is done to maintain the crop as weed free.
2. Seeds are sown in raised nursery beds.
3. Inter crops like marigold, onion, garlic are grown.
4. Yellow sticky traps are installed @ 4 per acre to monitor the sucking pests.
Systematic insecticides are sprayed to control sucking pest population.
5. Wettable sulphur 3 g or 5 ml Dicofol or spiromeciferon 3 ml or Propargite 3 ml per
litre is sprayed to control upward curling of leaves.
6. Trichogrammma parasite has to release 20, 000 per acre. Lace wing bugs are released
@ 2 per plant.
7. Trichoderma viridae culture is used for both seed treatment @ 4 g per kg of seed and
also to soil application in main field @ 1 kg is mixed with 100 kg of neem cake.
8. Sulphur based fungicides like wettable sulphur @3 g or Dicofol @ 5ml or
Spiromeciferon 3 ml or Propergite 3 ml /l of water is sprayed against mite (Upward
curling of leaves).
9. Fungicides like Mancozeb 2.5 g/l is sprayed against Anthracnose leaf spot, Bacterial
wilt is managed by applying 6 kg bleaching powder, COC @ 3 g/l is sprayed to
control Canophora wilt.
Lecture - 28
Cultivation of Cucubitaceous vegetables – characteristics – varieties –
growing cucurbits on pandal system
Cucurbits are the largest group of summer vegetable crops belonging to the family
cucurbitaceae.
List of cucrbitaceous vegetables:
S.No Crop Botanical Name
1 Cucumber Cucumis sativus
2 Pumpkin Cucurbita moschata
3 Summer squash Cucurbita pepo
4 Bottle gourd Lagenaria siceraria
5 Bitter gourd Momordica charantia
6 Ridge gourd Luffa acutangula
7 Sponge gourd Luffa cylindrica
8 Ash (wax) gourd Benincasahispida
9 Snake gourd Trichosanthesanguina
10 Pointed gourd Trichosanthesdioca
11 Round (squash melon) Citrullus lanatus
12 Musk melon Cucumis melo
13 Snap melon Cucumis melo var. momordica
14 Long melon Cucumis melo var. utilissimus
15 Coccinia Coccinia indica
16 Chow - chow Sechium edule
Characteristics of Cucurbits:
1. These are rich in Vitamin A, C and minerals.
2. Fruits are used for preparation of pickles and sweets.
3. Most of the cucurbits are monoecious in nature except Coccinia and pointed gourd
(Parval) which are dioecious.
4. The ratio of male and female flowers are different a plant. In general male flower ratio
is high than female flowers. Male flowers are present at the lower nodes then the
female flowers.
5. Female and male flower ratio is depends on the temperature and light intensity. High
temperature and high light intensity leads to more male flowers.
6. Female flower ratio can be increased by spraying Ethereal @ 250 ppm, Naphthalene
Acetic Acid, MH 50-100 ppm,Borax - 8 ppm twice at 2 leaf stage and at 4 leaf stage.
7. All are susceptible to frost. The cultural requirements of all crops in this group are
more or less similar.
Cultivation of Cucurbits on Pandal system:Cucurbits such as ridge gourd, snake gourd,
bitter gourd, bottle gourd are cultivated over pandal system.
• Bitter gourd, snake gourd has medicinal importance. Bitter taste in bitter gourd is due
to cucurbitacin.
• Sponge gourd and Ridge gourd contains a sticky substance called Luffa mainly used
in industries.
Climate: These vegetables prefer warm temperatures.
Soil: Soils with good moisture retention capacity are suitable.
2-3 seeds are sown. After germination only one strong seedling to be remained and other
ones are removed.
S.No Crop Varieties Seedrate Spacing Season Yield (t/a)
(kg/a)
1 Ridge gourd Jagtial long, Arka Sujatha, 1.4 -2 kg 1.5 -2.5 m x 60-90 cm Kharif : 6.8 t
PusaNasdal, Jaipur Long, January –July
Coimbatore Long Summer:
February - March
2 Sponge Pusa bikini 1.4 – 2 kg 1.5 -2.5 m x 60-90 cm Kharif : 6.8 t
gourd January –July
Summer:
February - March
3 Ash Gourd APAU- Shakti, Co-1, Co-2, 2-2.8 kg 3m x 75-90 cm June –July 8-12 t
BH- 24, 25 December- February
4 Bottle Gourd ArkaBahar, Pusa Summer 1.2 – 2.4 kg Summer : 2m x 50 cm Kharif: June –July Summer:
Prolific Long (PSPL), Pusa Kharif: 3m x 90 cm Summer: January - 10-12 t
Summer Hybrids (Pusa February Kharif:
Round), (PusaManjari), 10-12 t
PusaMeghdhooth
5 Snake gourd APAU, Swetha, Arka 2-2.4 kg 2m x 75-150 cm June – July Summer:
Sheetal, Co-1 December- January 6-9 t
Kharif: 7-
12 t
6 Bitter Gourd PusaMausami, Coimbatore 1.8- 2.4 kg Summer: 1.5m x 60 cm Kharif: June- July 4-6 t
Long Green, ArkaHarita Kharif: 2.5 m x 90 cm Summer: December -
January
7 Ivy Gourd Local types which are Stem cuttings 2m x 1.5 m June- February 4-8 t
green, slender, striped ones with 4 nodes
and a diameter
of fore finger.
1333-2000
cuttings/ac
Fertilizers: 6-8 t of Farm Yard Manure, 40 kg P, 20 kg K is applied before sowing. Nitrogen
@ 40 kg is applied in splits, one at 25-30 days after sowing and the other half dose at
flowering and fruiting stage.
Inter cultivation:Timely weeding is needed. Loosening of soil is done after 2-3 irrigations.
Borax @ 3 g or MH 250 mg/l is sprayed to increase the female flowers. Bitter gourd, snake
gourd are trained over pandals.
Irrigation: Depends on the soil moisture status, irrigation is given at 7-10 days intervals.
Harvest: Fruit size is the indication of maturity in cucurbits. Tenderness and edible maturity
are judged by pressing the skin little pubescence persisting on the skin. Ash gourd’s is
harvested when a layer is formed on fruit surface.
Seed Production: Minimum isolation distance of 100 m is maintained for seed purpose. In
Ridge gourd, seeds are collected after drying of fruits while in bitter gourd, seeds are
collected when the fruits are fully ripened.
Lecture 29
Cultivation of Cucurbits – Cucumber, Pumpkin and Squash
Scientific Name: Cucumis sativum
Family: Cucurbitaceae
Cucumber is used as salad or vegetable. It is rich in vitamin B and C and contains
plenty of water. It also possesses medicinal values. Oil extracted from seeds is good for body
and mind.
Climate:Warm weather is suitable for its cultivation. It cannot tolerate to frost. The condition
of high humidity and short day length will promote female flower production. Cucumber
requires minimum temperature of 180 C for seed germination 200 C for growth and
development.
Soil:Sandy loam soils gives early and good crop. it requires heavy soils will for high yield.
The crop can be grown successfully in slightly acidic soils pH 5.5 to 6.7. The soil should be
with proper drainage facility.
Varieties and hybrids:
Japanese long green: released from IARI. It is an extra early maturing variety. It matures
in 45 days after sowing.
Straight – 8:Released by IARI regional station, Kutrain fruit is light green in colour and
medium size.
PusaSamyog, Solan Hybrid -1 are F1 hybrids: female plants are identified from Japanese
types and planted in separate rows and pollinated naturally with other monoecious plants
thereby the female plants give F1 seeds.
Co-1, Poisettia, PusaKheeraare in cultivation.
Season:Kharif – June-July
Summer – January – March
Seed rate: 1-1.5 kg/ha
Seeds are first treated with Imidachloprid @ 5 g then with Captan /Thiram @ 3 g. per kg.seed
Sowing is done on raised beds or in furrows or in pits. Two seeds per hill are generally sown
in both sides of bed.In case of pit systems pits of 45 x 45 x 60 cm are dug up filled with
FYM, cattle manure and soil in equal proportions 3 to 4 seeds per pit are sown.Spacing
adopted is 1.5 to 3 m from row to row 60 to 90 cm from plant to plant.
Manuring:8 to 10 t per acre of FYM is to be mixed with soil or applied to the pit besides that
about 40 kg N, 20 kg P and 40 kg K per ha need to be applied. Half of Nitrogen, entire P and
K is applied in the pits or at the time of sowing. Remaining quantity of nitrogen is applied at
30 days after sowing.
Irrigation:
Cucumber cannot withstand water logging over irrigation should be avoided in dry weather
crop is irrigated in every 5th day. Flower initiation and full bloom stage are critical. For
irrigation fruit enlargement requires sufficient water.
Inter culture:
Training and pruning: Vines are trained on bamboo with the rope or wire for high
production and quality. Cucumber can be trained in bower system. The height of Bower
should be about 1.5 m and spacing is kept as 2 m x 1 m between row to row and plant to plant
respectively. Japanese long green and hybrids like Pusasamyog are suitable for bower system.
Pruning of secondary shoots up to 10 nodes increase the fruit production. Field
should be kept weed free throughout cropping season. First weeding may be given 15 to 20
days after sowing. Two more weedings are given at 25 to 30 day interval.
Harvesting: Harvesting starts from 45 days after sowing. Fruit takes 7 to10 days from setting
to reach marketable size. Cucumber is harvested when it is till tender and green. Over mature
fruit will fetches less price. Picking can be done at an interval of 2 days yield varies from 80
to 120 Q/ha.
Storage: Fruits are stored at 100C and 85% Relative humidity for 10-14 days. Spots appear
on fruit surface and spoils at low storage temperatures.
Seed extraction: Seeds are extracted by fermentation method and seeds are stored at 6-8%
moisture level.
Pumpkin and Squash
1. Pumpkin –Cucurbita morchata
2. Summer squash - Cucurbita pepo
3. Winter squash- Cucurbita maxima
Pumpkin is cultivated widely in our country. It has longer period of storage life and tolerates
to long distance transportation. Pumpkin leaves, flowers, tender twigs are used in culinary
preparation. Sweet is prepared with pulp is known as halva. Pumpkin is rich in vitamin C.
Climate: Warm weather is suitable for its successful cultivation with a range of 25 0C to
300C. if the temperature exceeds 400C, incidence of cucumber mosaic virus will be more.
Low temperature below 150C reduces the vine growth and fruit development.
Soil: Pumpkin and squash are cultivated in all type of soils. Soils with good drainage and a
pH of 6-7 are ideal.
Varieties:
Arka Chandan: Round fruit with pressed blossom end. Rind colour green with white
patches when immature which turns to light brown colour with self -coloured patches on
maturity. Fruit weight 2-3 kg rich in carotene.
PusaAlankar: it is F hybrid.
1
Co-1: fruits are 7-8 kg weigh, brown-orange colour. Crop duration is 150-160 days.
Winter squash
ArkaSuryamukhi: fruits are deep orange colour, smaller in size, weighs around 1 kg.
Resisitant to fruit fly. Crop duration is around 100 days.
Summer Squash: Early yellow prolific, Australian green, Partifen
Season: Kharif – June- July
Summer – December – Febraury
Seed rate and spacing: 2.4 – 3.2 kg seed is required for one acre. 3-4 seeds are sown at a
spacing of 3 m x 75-90 cm. after germination one strong plant is to be remained and other
plants has to remove.
Fertilizers: FYM @8-10 t, 40 Kg P and 20 kg K fertilizers are applied at the time of last
plough. 40 kg N is applied in two split doses i.e. 30 days after sowing and 45 days after
sowing.
Intercultivation: The crop needs regular watering for this the furrows should kept weed free.
Spraying of Borax 3g/l or Etheral 2.5 ml/l of water twice at weekly intervals gives more
number of female flowers.
Harvesting: Pumpkin and winter squash are harvested when the colour changes from yellow
to orange and at full developed stage.
Summer squash is harvested at green colour stage before attainment of full maturity
and transported immediately as it is susceptible to transportation and longer period of storage.
Yield: It takes100-120 days to harvest depending on the variety and type.
Average yield: 8-10 t/ac.
Storage: Pumpkin and winter squash are stored at 150C -200C for 2-3 weeks and at a
temperature of 10 -15 0C and Relative Humidity of 75% these can be stored for 5-6 weeks.
Lecture 30
Cultivation of Cabbage, Cauliflower – Physiological disorders-
management
The word cole was originated from the word Caules means stem.They are originated single
wild species wild cliff cabbage known as “Cole worts”Brassica oleracea var silvestris.
Six varieties of Brassica species are.
1. Brassica oleracea var capitata- Cabbage
2. Brassica oleracea var botrytis -Cauliflower
3. Brassica oleracea var gongiloides- Knolkhol
4. Brassica oleracea var gemmifera -Brussel sprout
5. Brassica oleracea var italica -Sprouting broccoli
6. Brassica oleracea var acephala- Kale
Cabbage
Scientific name: Brassica oleracea var. capitata
Family: Cruciferaceae
Cabbage was described as more or less compact leaf formed head. The main stem axil
of the head or true cabbage is sharp and thick. Edible part of cabbage is known as head it is
formed by the development of densely packed leaves around the growing point. Like other
leafy vegetables cabbage is low in proteins, fats, high in fibre which is a good remedy for
constipation. Leaves of cabbage are rich in vitamin A, vitamin C, Phosphorous, Sodium,
Potash and Iron.
Nutritional values of cabbage (for every 100 g)
Vitamin C 124 mg
Phosphorous 44 mg
Potash 114 mg
Sodium 14.1 mg
Iron 0.8 mg
Cabbage is one of the important winter vegetables, used in salads, cooked vegetable and
pickled which is called as Sauerkrat.
Climate: Cabbage prefers cool weather and it is mainly cultivated during winter months. it
tolerates frost to a certain extent and a mean temperature of 5-300C is preferred for
production of quality heads. High temperatures reduce the quality of head.
Soil: Sandy loam considered best for an early crop. For late crop heavy soil clay loams and
silty loams are preferred. It can be cultivated luxuriantly in all soil types, except saline soils.
Varieties:Varietiesare grouped according to round, size, shape and colour of leaves. These
are grouped into four types.
1. Round head group:
a. Golden acre: suitable for early season and ready in 60-65 days. Head are white with good
quality.
b. Pride of India: Cabbage heads are round and ready for harvest in 60-80 days.
c. Copen hagen market:Heads are round, large and compact.
d. Green express: Heads are large,popular in West Bengal.
2. Flat head or Drum Head group:
a. Pusa Drum Head: It is a selection from EC-6774. It is resistant to Black leg and dry rot
diseases. Late variety takes 100-120 days for harvest.
3. Conical Head group:
a. Jersey wake field: medium duration type ready in 60-80 days.
4. Savoygroup:foliage very much glittered and wrinkled. Leaves are twine with little
bloomy. This group includes chief drum head savoyee.
Example: Drum head savoyee
Sowing Time: Short Duration: August – September
Medium duration: September
Long duration: October
In hills it is sown during March –June for vegetable purpose and for seed production it is
cultivated during July-August.
Seed rate and Spacing: 500 -750 g of seed is required for one hectare. Seeds are mixed with
fine sand and sown in raised beds. 30 -35 days old seedlings of 2-3 leaf stage are transplanted
in main field at a spacing of 60x45-50 cm.
Manures and Fertilizers: 20-25 ton of Farm Yard Manure to be incorporated at the time of
last plough. Superphosphate @150-200 kg, Potash @ 200 kg are to be applied during last
plough. 60-80 kg of Nitrogen is applied in 3 split doses one at 25-30 DAT, 2nd dose at 60
DAT and 3rd dose at 75-80 DAT.
Intercultivation: Earthing up helps to produce healthy heads it is done four to six weeks
after transplanting. Mulching with polyethylene sheet control weed and conserve moisture.
Based on requirement sufficient irrigation regular is required as uneven soil moisture leads to
breaking of heads.
Harvesting: Early varieties mature relatively a high temperature heads become loose at
initial stages bud gradually become harder with cooling temperatures. These are ready to
harvest in about 60-80 days while late varieties take 100-120 days. Heads are harvested when
they attain full size and compact.
Yield:Short duration varieties – 30-35 t/ha
Long duration varieties – 35-40t/ha
Seed yield: 500-600 kg/ha
Storage: Heads are stored at 00C and 85% Relative humidity for few weeks and at room
temperature these can be stored for 4-5 days.
Seed production: Cabbage is highly cross pollinated crop. Minimum isolation distance of
800 m is to follow for seed production. Seed production is mainly employed in hills. Seed
production is done by following methods
1. Head intact method: In this method, head is kept intact and only a cross cut is given
to facilitate the emergence of stalk.
2. Stump intact method: Heads are cut just below the base by means of sharp knife,
keeping the stem with whorl of leaves. Beheaded portion of plant is called stump.
Seed production is high in this method.
3. Core intact method: The outer leaves are removed in all sides with downward
perpendicular cuts in such a way that central core is not damaged.
Cauliflower
Scientific Name: Brassica oleracea var. botrytis
Family: Cruciferae
Cauliflower is a rich source of vitamin A, C, Phosphorous, Calcium, Magnesium, Sodium,
Iron and Carbohydrates. The terminal cluster forms a firm, succulent immature inflorescence
(cluster of flower) is known as curd.
Climate: Cauliflower is a cool weather crop and response well to temperature and
photoperiod.The average optimum monthly temperature is 15-20OC with the average
maximum at 250C and the minimum at 80 C. Early varieties require higher temperature in
short days. At relatively lower temperature the curds of early varieties become ricy, leafy,
loose and yellow resulting in poor quality. In case of late varieties the curds remain under
sized or small, showing some signs of bolting at relatively lower temperature. In hot dry
weather, the curd becomes small and hard.
Soil: Fairly deep loamy soils are preferable even it can be grown in sandy loam, silt loams
and clay loams. Soil should be rich organic matter and well drained.Cauliflower is sensitive
to high acidity.It requires an average pH of 5.5 to 6.6.
Varieties: Cauliflower has specific temperature and photoperiod for its proper growth. Thusit
is very essential that the early, mid and late varieties are planted at proper time. In general
short duration varieties are small, light yellow in colour, medium duration ones are big sized
with white colour curds and long duration varieties are milky white in colour. Based on the
duration varieties are grouped into three types.
Short duration varieties: Suitable for early planting in season. Curds are ready in 70-80
days. Curds are small and yellow in colour.
Eg: PusaKatki, Early Market, Early Kunwari, Pusa Deepali
Medium or Main crop: Suitable for planting in middle of the season. Curds are ready in 90-
100 days. Curds become loose and turns to yellow if delayed in harvesting.
Eg: Snowball, Giant Snowball
Long duration varieties: Suitable for late season planting. takes 100-120 days for
harvesting. Curds are medium in size and milky white.
Eg: Snowball – 16, Pusa Snowball-1
Four types of curds:
1. Ricy:Inflorescence stalk is long, curds are loose and small. It is due to high
temperature at maturity or delay in harvest. Selection of good quality seed and timely
sowing is essential to overcome it.
2. Fizzy: Long stretched stalk with velvety curds. It may be due to genetic character or
unfavorable weather conditions.
3. Leafy Curds: Due to unfavorable growing conditions, small leaves appear in the
middle of curds.
4. Matured curds: Curds attain its full size and colour.
Sowing time:Short duration varieties: July – August
Medium duration varieties: August- September
Long duration varieties: September- October
Seed rate: short duration varieties – 600-700 g/ ha
Long duration varieties – 350-400 g/ha
Seeds are mixed with fine sand and sown in nursery beds. Seedlings of 30-35 days age are
transplanted in the main field.
Spacing: Short duration varieties – 45 x 45 cm
Medium and Long duration varieties – 60 x 45 cm
Fertilizers: Phosphorous and Potassic fertilizers @ 40-50 kg and 50 kg/ha are applied during
last plough. Nitrogenous fertilizers 2 60-80 kg/ha are applied in three split doses first at 25-30
days after transplanting, second at 50-60 DAT and third at 75-80 DAT.
Boron and Molybdenum deficiencies are found when it grown in acidic or basic soils. For
this Boron @ 0.3 -0.4% is sprayed twice one at two weeks after transplanting and before curd
initiation. To overcome Molybdenum deficiency, Sodium Molybdate @ 1-2 kg /ha is applied
in soil.
Intercultivation and Irrigation: Gap filling after 20 days of planting to maintain the
population and uniform growth. Hoeing and weeding on 30th and 45th day is done. Avoid
deep inter cultivation as it is a shallow rooted crop.Irrigation is given once in a week based on
soil moisture availability.
Blanching: Covering of the growing curds withlower leaves is called blanching. It is done to
protect the curds from sunlight with the help of thread or rubber bands. It helps in easier
harvesting if it is done with different coloured threads / bands.
Harvesting: Curds are harvested when they attain full size. Usually curds are harvested along
with 2-3 leaves for easy transport. These can be stored at room temperature for 4-5 days. At a
temperature of 1 0C and Relative Humidity of 85-90% curds can be stored for about 30 days.
Yield:When the cauliflower curds mature at a higher temperature above 250C, the curds are
small, loose and yellow.In spite of closer spacing which is followed by the growers, the yield
hardly exceeds 10 t/ ha.With cooler season, the midseason cultivars can yield upto 20 t/ha.
Physiological disorders in cauliflower:
1. Buttoning
2. Riceyness
3. Browning
4. Whiptail
Buttoning: This disorder is characterized by development of small curd. Buttoning may be
due to overaged seedlings, poor nitrogen supply, planting wrong cultivar, i.e., early cultivar
planted late and also due to root injury by insects or by some disease. It can be overcome by
transplanting 21-25 days old seedlings, application of optimum dose of nitrogenous fertilizers
and transplanting of the early season cultivars in time.
Riceyness: Premature initiation of floral buds is characterized by riceyness in cauliflower and
is considered to be of poor quality for marketing. Such disorder may result from any
temperature higher or lower than the optimum required for a particular cultivar. Choosing the
cultivars which can tolerate high temperature and timely harvesting of the curds can
overcome riceyness.
Browning: This is caused by boron deficiency. It appears as small water soaked areas in the
centre of the curd. Later, the stem becomes hollow with soaked tissue surrounding the walls
of the cavity. In more advanced stage, pinkish or rusty brown areas develop on the surface
of the curd and hence, it is also known as brown rot or red rot. Affected curd develops a
bitter taste. It can be controlled by application of borax or sodium borate @ 20 kg/ha. In
case of acute deficiency, spray of 0.25 to 0.50% solution of borax @ 1 to 2 kg/ha is
advocated.
Whiptail:This results due to deficiency of molybdenum. The leaf blades do not develop
properly and become strap-like. The growing point is severely deformed and no marketable
head is formed. It occurs in acidic soil below pH 4.5. Whiptail can be prevented by brining
the soil pH to 6.5 by liming with 5-7.5 t/ha of limestone or by applying 2.5-5 kg/ha of
sodium or ammonium molybdate. Foliar spray with 0.05% sodium molybdate solution is
also recommended.
Blindness: It is supposed to be due to low temperature when the plants are small or due to
damage to the terminal bud during handling of the plant or due to insect pest like cut worms
which eat the terminal bud.
Lecture-31
Cultivation of Carrot – Management practices
Carrot
Scientific Name: Dacus carota
Family: Umbelliferae
Carrot is grown all over India and is used for human consumption as well as forage
and particularly for feeding. It is taken raw as well as cooked in curries and is made into
pickle and sweets.
Black carrots are used for the preparation of a sort of beverage called kanji, which is
a support to be a good appetite.The orange coloured varieties are rich in carotene a precursor
of vitamin A and contain appreciable quantity of thiamine and riboflavin.
For every 100g carrot
Vitamin A - 3.150 mg
Carbohydrates - 10.6 mg
Sodium – 35.6 mg
Potash – 108 mg
Climate: Carrot is cool season crop.Some of the tropical types tolerate quite high
temperature. Colour development and growth of roots is affected by temperature. At the
temperature of 15 to 200 Ccolour development is good.At the temperature of 20- 250 C results
in poor colour development. At high temperatures length of the root is short and at low
temperature root length is long.
Soil: It requires deep well drained sandy loam. This type of soil is particularly good for early
crop. Heavy soils will check the development of roots and cause forked lateral roots.Carrot
does not grow well in highly acidic soil. Maximum yield can be obtained at pH of 6.5.
Types:
They are two groups.
1. Asiatic type
2. European type
1. Asiatic types:These are red in colour due to anthocyanin pigments. Roots are long
and smooth with conical shaped root ends. Produce roots and seeds freely in the
plains.
Ex: Pusa Kesar – a cross between Local Red and Nantes.
2. European types: Roots are small. Roots become hard if delay in harvesting. Rich in
carotene.
Ex:Nantes, Chanteny
Bolting: Production of flowering before the crop is harvested is known as bolting. Bolting
results in poor root growth.
Time of Sowing: September – January
Year round cultivation is possible in areas where the summer temperatures are less.
Seed rate: 5-6 kg/ha.
Method of sowing &Spacing: Seeds are thin and light they are mixed with soil at 1:10 ratio.
Seeds are sown to a depth of 1 to5 cm at a spacing of 30 cm between rows (within rows 5
cm). The seeds germinate within 5 to 10 days after sowing under good moisture conditions.
Thinning has to be done at distance 5 to10 cm. Thinning is done at 8 to 10days after
germination. Optimum spacing is 30 x 5-10 cm.
Manures & Fertilizers: Carrot is a heavy feeder. 20-30 t of farm yard manureis applied at
the time of last plough. Fresh Cowdung should not be applied it may cause forking of roots.
Fertilizer dose of 60 kg Nitrogen, 50 kg Phosphorous and 100 kg Potash to be appliedbefore
sowing.
Irrigation:First irrigation is given soon after seed sowing this has to be followed. Four to six
days after sowing. Irrigation is given at 6 to 10 days interval.
Earthing up: Should be done at 60 to 70 days after sowing to help in development of roots.
The soil is earthed up covered the top of developing roots to prevent loss of colour of tops,
the tops becomes green and toxic on exposure to sun light.
Harvesting: Early carrots are harvested when they are partly developed.For the purpose of
distinct markets otherwise they are retained in the soil till they reach full maturity stage they
should not be retained afterward.There are two methods of harvesting.
1. Roots are dug out when they are sufficiently moist withkhurpi or spade. Light
irrigation has to be given before harvest, so that easy pulling of roots can be facilitated
without damage by holding the leaves.
In case of Asiatic variety the roots are harvested when they attain marketable stage 2.5 to
5 cm in diameter, at the upper end after harvesting the roots they are trimmed and washed
before sending them to the market.
Yield: Tropical types give around 20 to 30 ton per ha.
Storage: At 00C -4.5 0C and 98% RH carrots are stored for 3-5 months.
Seed production:
a. In-situ Method:Plants with matured roots are left in the field for flowering. Seeds
produced in this method are of poor quality.
b. Transplanted method: After development of the roots selected plants are transplanted in
other place. Seeds produced in this method are of good quality. Seeds yield of 5-6 q/ ha can
be obtained in this method.
Lecture 32
Cultivation of Onion – Management practices
Scientific name: Allium cepa
Family:Amarylladaceae
It is consumed either raw or cooked along with spices and vegetables. Primarly the
bulbs used as vegetables. The flowering shoot known as Scape is also used as vegetable.It is
rich in minerals like phosphorus and calcium and carbohydrates.It also contains Protein and
Vitamin C.
Pungency in onion is due to the presence of a volatile compound called “Allyl Propyl
di Sulphide”. Red colour is due the pigment anthocyanin and yellow colour is due to
Quercetin.
Climate: Onion is best suited as a tropical crop. It does best where the season is mild without
the extremes of heat or cold or excessive rainfall. A relatively high temperature as well as
long photo period (a temperature of 15.6 to 21.1O C for about 10 hours a day and about 80%
RH) is essential for bulb formation.
Soil: It grows best in light soils which may be sandy loam or silt loam. Sandy soils with high
organic matter are suitable. It is sensitive to higher acidity and the optimum pH of the soil
should range from 5.8 to 6.5 and the land should be prepared to fine tilth. Soils with poor
drainage, saline soils are not suitable.
Varieties: Onion varieties are red, white and yellow in colour.
Red coloured varieties: N-53, Pusa Red, Nasik Red, Hissar -2, Punjab Selection
White coloured varieties: Pusa white flat, Pusa white round, Punjab -48, Udaipur -102
Yellow coloured varieties: Early Grano, Bermuda Yellow, ArkaPitambar (Less pungent one
suitable for export purpose to Europe countries).
Hybrids: ArkaLalima: suitable for export purpose to Gulf countries.Resistant to leaf spot
disease and can be stored for 5 months.
ArkaKeertiman: Red coloured variety suitable for both Kharif and Rabi seasons. Suitable
for export purpose.
Season Time of Sowing Time of Transplanting
Kharif June –July First fortnight of August
Rabi October – January First fortnight of December
Seed rate: 3-4kg of seed is sufficient to transplant seedlings for one acre. Seeds are sown in
raised beds of 4 m length, 1 m width and 15 cm height. 6 to 8 weeks old seedlings which are
about 15 cm tall are transplanted.Fordirect sowing the seed rate has to be doubled.
Bulbs:When bulbs are planted the seed rate is 1000 to 1200 per Ha.Bulbs of about 1/2inch
diameter are dibbled on one side of ridge or in plain beds.
Spacing: 20 x10 cm2 for seedlings, 30 x10cm2 for bulbs. Seeds are treated with Captan or
Thiram (3g/kg seed) or Trichidermaviridae (4 g/kg). Drenching with Copper Oxy Chloride
@ 3g/ l is done at 10 days interval to avoid damping off disease.
Carbofuran 3 G granules @ 100 g are applied in mixing with fine sand.
Manuring: 25 ton of FYM,60 to 100 KgN, 40 to 60 Kg P O and 60 to 80 Kg ofK O. FYM
2 5 2
should be incorporated at the time of field preparation, P and K along with half of N should
be applied in bands, 5 cm below the seedlings to the side before transplanting. The rest of N
may be top dressed 2 months after planting.
Irrigation: It requires 14-18 irrigations from planting to harvest depending on the season. At
bulb formation stage i.e 70 to 75 days after planting irrigation is essential.Drought at this
stage results in cracking of the bulb and low yield.
Harvesting: Green bunch onions areharvested when they are lead pencil thickness with a
small bulb, as a direct vegetable.
As a bulb crop is comes to harvest after four months of planting. A well matured bulb
should be harvested by putting out or digging out the bulbs.Maturity is indicated by the tops
dropping just above the bulb while the leaves are still green. The outer scales on the bulbs
become loose and coloured.
Yield:Kharif- 80-100 t/ac
Rabi – 120-140 t/ac
Storage:After harvesting onions are dried under shade. Application of Maleic Hydrazide
@2000 ppm before 15 days of harvesting improves the storage life by 8 months.
Precautions to be taken:
• Withheld of irrigation before 15 days of harvesting.
• Bulbs should be shade dried.
• The bulb after harvesting are left in the field under shade for four days for curing
which helps the bulbs in improvement of colour and quality of bulbs.
Physiological disorders: The phenomenon ofpremature production of seed stalk is known as
bolting. It reduces the growth of the bulbs. Some of the salient features of bolting are the
bolts are little bit smaller in size than normal inflorescence. Bolting occurred to the extent of
50 to 80% in the onions planted in the later part of kharif or early rabi season. Bolting may be
due to one or two more factors like varietal difference, extremes of temperature, growth
obstacles, poor seed quality, poor soil, amount of sun shine etc.
Seed production: Seed production is possible in tropical plains. Onion is a Cross pollinated
crop hence an isolation distance of 1000 m to be maintained.There are two methods in seed
production.
Bulb to seed method: In this method, bulbs of 2.5 – 3 cm diameter are required @ 1500
kg/ha for seed production. Bulbs are planted during first fortnight of October in beds or
ridges at a spacing of 45 x 15 cm. flowering commences 3 months after planting thereby seed
formation takes within 1-11/2 months and are ready for harvest. To prevent the loss of seed
from burst heads should harvest when it matures without delay. Seed should be dried for 1-2
days in shade. This method is used for nucleus and foundation seed production. Seed yield of
8010 q/ha which is less as compared to seed to seed method.
Seed to seed method: Seeds are sown in nursery beds from September - November and
transplanted in November – December. Bulbs are ready in April-May. Good quality bulbs are
selected and these are again planted in the months of September – October. Seed formation
will be completed by April –May. It takes around 11/2 year for seed production with seed
yield of 10-15 q/ha. This method is useful in varieties which are not suitable for storage or to
produce seed in huge quantity of a new variety.
Lecture 33
Cultivation of Colacasia and Elephant foot yam
Colacasia
Scientific name: Colacasia esculenta
Family:Areace
Colacasia is a minor tuber crop, mainly cultivated for edible roots.Tubers of colacasia are
called as corms and these are used for making chips. Leaves and young leaf stalks are also
cooked as used as spinach. Corms and cormels, petioles and leaves we used as vegetable.
Tubers have allergic reaction due to the presence of calcium oxalate.
Climate:High temperature with high humidity is congenial for its successful cultivation.
Soil:In tropical areas, it requires frequent irrigation and hence soils with high water holding
capacity are good to take up the cultivation of Colocasia.Colocasia is grown in heavy soils
and can withstand to some extent water logged conditions.
Varieties:
1. KovvurShathamukhi: Released from APAU. Tubers possess less oxalate. very good
cooking quality. Yields 15 – 20 tonnes per hectare.
2. Kasi Bugga: Tuber yield of 12-15 t/ha.
3. Panchamukhi: Mainly used as leafy vegetable. Tubers yield of 23 t/ha.
Season: In our state, crop can be cultivated from February to April while in coastal districts
of Andhra Pradesh it is cultivated twice i.e. June- July and Feb- Apr.
Seed rate and Spacing:Cormels or daughter corms in some cases mother corms also used for
planting material. Large size cormels are better than the mother corms.The plant material is
stored in a shady place and covered with leaves. The cormels are pre-sprouted and healthy
corms are selected for planting. around one tonne seed / corms are required for one hectare.
Spacing: 60 x 20 cm.
Intercultivation:Regular weeding is done to keep the field as weed free. Mulching is
practices with dry lands per plant material that given organic matter.
Manuring: Well decomposed FYM @ 12.5 to per ha along with 60, 60 and 60 kg of N, P, K
per hectare are applied. Irrigation throughout the life period is beneficial when rainfed
cultivation is adopted.Increase in the number of supplementary irrigations should increase
yield.
Harvesting: It takes 3 months formaturity is indicated by yellowing of leaves later on turns
to brown colour. Tubers are harvested by digging with pick axe.
Yield: 15-25 t/ ha.
Storage: Daughter corms are separated from mother corms and cleaned by removing the
adhering soil. These can be stored for 2-21/2 months without sprouting.
Elephant Foot Yam
Scientific name:Amarphophaluscompanulatus
Family:Araceae
It is cultivated in tropical and subtropical areas.
Climate: Climatic requirement of yam depends on different stages of growth. For vegetative
growth well distributed rainfall with warm and humid and for tuber development cool and dry
climate is essential. Heavy rains and water stagnating conditions cause tuber rot.
Soil: it can be grown from light to heavy soils though a rich red-loamy soil with a pH range
of 5.5 -7.0 is preferred.
Varieties: Gajendra and Sree Padma are the popular varieties.
Time of sowing: February – April
Seed rate and Spacing: Propagation is by tubers and are used after 2-21/2 months after
harvest. Tubers of ½ -3/4 kg are used. If tubers are large, they are cut into 2-4 pieces and
should possess a sprouting bud. Tubers are planted at a spacing of 90 x 90 cm and a depth of
10-15 cm.
Manures and Fertilizers: well decomposed Farm Yard Manure @ 25-30 t/ha, NPK @ 150 –
50-150 kg/ha. Entire P should be applied during last plough. Nitrogen and Potash fertilizers
are applied in 3 split doses at 45, 90 and 120 days after planting.
Intercultivation: Need based weeding and irrigation is to be given.
Harvesting: tubers are ready in 8-10 months after planting and are harvested by digging with
pick axe. Harvested tubers are cleaned and shade dried for 1-2 months.
Yield: 60-70 t/ha.
Lecture 34
Importance of flower cultivation – garden features – Fence – Paths- Lawns
– Flowering plants -annuals- shrubs -trees
Flowers are being used for various social and religious offerings in all the cultures.
Cultivation of flowers both as cut flower and loose flower purpose are gaining importance
due to the increase in standard of living. Considering the horticulture industry, flower
cultivation is one of the potential components as it provides aesthetic, social and economic in
way of providing employment opportunities round the year and gives scope for value
addition to earn foreign exchange. Different segments like cut flower cultivation, loose
flower, potted plants production, nursery industry, cut greens, flower seed and planting
material production, colour pigments, dried flowers, perfumes and essential oil production are
provides enormous scope in floriculture. According to the estimates done during 2018-19,
area under flower crops was 12000 ha in open and 400 ha in polyhouses, production about
55,000 mt of flowers and 1287 lakh cut flowers.
Important flower crops grown in Telangana: Rose, Tuberose, Chrysanthemum, Aster,
Marigold, Jasmine, Gladiolus, Gerbera, Carnation.
Garden Features:
Ornamental gardens are meant for beauty and recreation purpose. In laying of any garden, use
of various garden components breaks the monotony and enhances the aesthetic value. Some
of the garden features are as:
Lawn: it is one of the most important components of a garden gives a view of green carpet
on the ground. It not only enhances the beauty and makes the area to look large.
Hedge: shrubs or trees planted at regular intervals to form a continuous screen is called a
hedge. It serves the purpose of screening of unwanted places. These are pruned to maintain a
height of 50 to 60 cm.
Plants used: Acalypha, Duranta
Edge: Lining of borders of flower beds, paths, lawn and shrubbery with brick, concrete,
living plants etc ., is known as edge. The main purpose of edge is demarcation or decoration.
Plants with dwarf growth and which withstands frequent trimming are used for edging.
Plants used : Alternanthera, Eupatorium.
Rockery: this is intended to bring together in a short space an idea of a mountain or garden
with plants growing in the crevices of rocks. This is an elevated structure resembling a
miniature mountain range or slope of a hill with a few dominant peaks.
Fence:fence is a utility item essentially needed for marking the boundary and for protection
and also put to separate one part of the garden from the other. Several materials such as
wood, bamboo, wire, wire nettings are used for fence.
Drives, roads, walks and Path:all these in a garden should be laid out after due
consideration is given to its necessary and artistic appeal.They should serve to link one part
with the other part. Paths may be made up of earth, brick and concrete or be paved.
Topiary:certain plants are often trimmed to shapes of animals, birds, seats etc. the shrubs
which are amenable for bending and withstand frequent trimming are suitable for developing
topiary.
1.Flowering annuals:
Name of the plant Planting time Flowering time
Asters September - October January - February
Hollyhock December – January July –August
Celosia argentea Throughout the year 3 months after sowing
Sunflower April –May 35-40 days after sowing
Cosmos September - October March – April
Phlox September – October & January December – January & April –
–February May
Zinnia Throughout the year 6 weeks after sowing
Shrubs: 1. Acalypha hispida
2. Hibiscus rosachinensis
1. Ixora
2. Jasminumsambac
3. Periwinkle (Vinca rosea)
4. Tabernamentana
Trees:
1. Spathodeacompanulatum
2. Delonix regia
3. Casia sp.
4. Azadaricta indica
5. Enterolobea so.
6. Eucalyptus
7. Polyalthea sp.
Climbers:
1. Quisqualis indica
2. Ipomea salvata
3. Bougainvillea
4. Jasminum grandiflorum
Lecture 35
Ornamental gardens – formal gardens – informal gardens - features
An ornamental garden is a place where plants are arranged in an aesthetic manner.
Plants can be grouped together in various ways to give an aesthetic effect. Each such
grouping is called a Feature. Any garden comprises some of all of such features and hence
the features are also called the components of garden.
Styles of garden: two types of styles garden
5. Formal gardens
6. Informal gardens
1.Formal garden: in this type of gardens, everything is done in as straight and narrow way in
a symmetrical or a geometrical pattern. Everything is planted in straight lines. The hedges,
edges and topiary are maintained in proper shape by regular training and pruning. Symmetry
is always maintained in the garden by undertaking similar type of plantation and using similar
garden technique and adornments. If there is one type of plants or featureson the one side of
garden, the same thing should also be repeated on the other side of the garden.
Eg: Mughal garden, French garden
1. Mughal gardens: These gardens are laid during the Mughal’s period and Babar (1494 -
1531) was the first emperor to introduce Mughal gardens into India. These are the replica of
gardens Central Asia, Persia.
Features of Mughal Gardens:
1. Site and Design: Mughals always selected site on hill slope with perennial source of
water or along with the banks of perennial river. The gardens were mostly square or
rectangular in the shape.
2. Walls and Gates: These gardens were surrounded with high walls so that it may not be
easily accessed by enemies and protection from hot winds. The entrance was provided with
huge wooden gates studded with iron nails and pointed iron spikes.
3.Terraces: Mughals came from hilly terrain. So they had intrinsic inclination towards
terrace.Some gardens have seven terraces corresponding to seven planets.
4. Tomb or Mosque: It was common practice to create garden around Tomb or Mosque.
Usually, Mughal gardens have been developed with a monument of Tomb or Mosque.
Ex: Taj garden around Taj mahal.
5. Baradari: This feature with permanent roof and raised platform for sitting. Baradari
usually provided with 12 doors on all sides. These were constructed to enable the emperor to
watch the performance of dancing, rain shower.
2.French Gardens: During 16th century, these styles of gardens gained importance with the
contribution of Le-Notre (1643-1700 A.D.) at Vaux-Le-Vicomte. The French garden style
seems to teach the lesson of “How to think Big”.
3. Informal Gardens: Informal gardens are laid not in a definite pattern. These are laid to
imitate the nature. Roads, paths are not laid in a definite design. Trees, other plants are grown
particularly for their colour and not according to their height.
Ex: Japanese gardens, English gardens
1. English gardens:Due to favourable climatic conditions, such as high annual rainfall, the
natural ground cover in the England is grass. In consonance to this, the famous British
architect Repton and Brown advocated the concept that the British garden which look like
the country side without any artificial barriers such as fences or hedges, etc.
The main features of the garden:
a) curved paths
b) informal group of trees
c) lawn
d) herbaceous border
e) shrubbery and rockery
2.Japanese Gardens:An open space, a pond with an island in the midst of it, hillock on the
south of pond and a stream of water consisted typical feature of garden. Water stream is
divided into two parts, one is directed to pond and the other one is directed to hillock to have
a water fall. Immutability is another strong feature of Japanese gardens. Except some
seasonal changes in the deciduous trees, the Japanese garden hardly goes under any other
strong visible changes during different season. Even during winter, the Japanese garden has
their own beauty with snowflakes hanging down the stone pieces or stone lanterns.
Plants suitable to grow in Ornamental gardens:
Lecture 36
Cultivation of important Flower crops –Rose – Management Practices –
pruning – Pest and diseases- byproducts of Rose
Scientific name:Rosa species
Family: Rosaceae
Rose is top most cut flower crops cultivated globally and considered as queen of flowers.
There are different classes of roses as
1. Hybrid Teas: Produces single large flowers on each branch.
Ex: Gladiator, Cardinal etern, Pink rose
1. Floribundas: Produces medium sized flowers in bunches and remain fresh for many
days.
Ex: Lutein, Redtremp, Weeping China doll
2. Miniature:Plants are dwarf with small leaves and produces small flowers. Suitable to
grow in pots.
Ex: Pink spray, Nartaki, Preeti
3. Polyanthus: Produces small flowers in bunches during summer. Suitable for Hedge.
4. Climbing Roses: These climb against a support and produces small flowers in flushes.
Ex: Climbing summer snow, climbing snowball
5. Damask: Suitable for oil extraction due to their fragrance.
6. Grandifloras: Produces large flowers in bushes. Suitable for growing in gardens and
for loose flowers also.
Soil: Roses can be successfully grown in red loam, sandy loam and silty loam soils. Soil pH
of 6.5 – 7.5 is ideal for rose but sensitive to saline soils. Soils rich in organic matter with
good water holding capacity are ideal for its cultivation.
Climate: Rose is a sun loving plant which needs at least 8 hours of sunlight. Temperature
fluctuations affect flower yield and quality adversely. Day and night temperatures of 300C
and 150C are ideal whereas, colour development takes place at 180C.
Propagation: Rose is propagated by means of stem cuttings and budding. It is commercially
propagated by T-budding. Rosa indica and Rosa multiflora are suitable for root stock
purpose.
Spacing: Depending upon the soil types, roses are planted at a spacing of 75-120 cm. Pits of
45 cm X 45 cm X 30 cm size are prepared for plantation of rose plantlets. Pits are exposed
to sun for about 15 days then the pits are refilled with soil –manure mixture. Commercially
grown hybrids are planted at a spacing of 60 x 60 cm which accommodates 8500 plants per
acre.
Planting time:though it can be planted from June – January, the best time for planting roses
is during September – October.
Irrigation: light watering is given after planting to till new growth appears, thereafter
irrigate the plants at 8-10 days interval.
Pruning:Pruning is done to produce best quality flowers and to maintain good shape and to
keep plants healthy by removing dead parts. Three to four months after planting the rose
plant is first pruned. Four branches placed in four directions are chosen and these are pruned
back to an outer bud leaving two to four buds on the stump. Pruning is done once in a year
during October- November months. Hybrid Teas are pruned 45 days before and Floribundas
are pruned 42 days before flowering.
1. All the dead, dried, weak branches are to be pruned.
2. Any new growth appear on the root stock should be removed regularly.
3. Strong shoots are pruned to desired height (depends on the type) with a sharp knife at least
5 mm above the outer side of the bud.
4. Centre of the plant should be pruned to penetrate light, air which improves the flower size.
5. In Tea roses strong shoots are pruned to 2/3 of their length whereas in of Floribundas are
pruned to 1/4 of their length.
6. Bordeaux paste is applied at the pruned surfaces.
Fertilizers: Immediately after pruning, each plant should be nourished with 7-8 kg of FYM,
3-5 kg of Neem cake. 15-20 days after this, Urea, Phosphorous and Potash should be mixed
in 1:8:3 ratios and 100 g of these mixture is to apply for each plant and it is applied for 2-3
times. In addition, micronutrients viz., MgSo @ 20 g, MnSo @ 15 g, Feso @ 10 g, Borax
4 4 4
@ 5 g should be mixed in one litre of water and sprayed before flowering to increase flower
size.
Yield: After initial planting in July- August, Rose starts blooming from October and plant
will yield on economic scale for 3 years.For commercial purpose, Roses areplucked at the
bud stage.
Plant Protection:
Pests:
1. Beetles: these eat the leaves during night time. This can be managed by applying 15 kg of
Malathion 5% dust at evening times.
2.Thrips: These are very minute insects which distort the leaves. Curled leaves with brown
marks and deformed buds with burnt margins are the main symptoms of damage. Spraying of
Fipronil 2ml/l or Profenofos 2ml/l or Imidacloprid at 0.3 ml/l reduces the infestation.
3. Red Spider Mite: Very minute insects or mites spin webs on the underside of leaves. Red
mites infest only during dry months. The affected leaves look dull as mite suck sap from
leaves. Insecticidal spray with Dicofol, and dusting with Sulphur can control this pest.
Diseases:
1.Powdery mildew: Foliage, young stems and stalk of flower buds of rose are coated with
powdery dust. Affected petals lost its colour and wither and dry.
Control: Spraying with Dinocap 1ml or Carbendazim 1 g per litre of water reduces the
infestation.
2. Black spot: circular black spots on the leaves causing severe defoliation and is a common
fungal disease of rose. Initially, brown or yellow spots appear on the lower leaves which then
turn into black spots. The affected leaves turn yellow and fall off. In severe cases leaves drop
and growth ceases.
Control: Spraying of Captan 2 g or Mancozeb 2 g or Carbendazim 1 g per litre of water.
3. Die-Back: This is the most dreaded disease of rose. The stems die back from top down
wards and gradually the whole plant. Stem and roots turns to brown colour.
Control:The affected stem or branch is cut 2-3 inches below the effected part and a cap of
fresh cow-dung mixed with Copper Sulphate or Bordeaux paste alone is put over the cut
wound.
Rose based products – Perfume and allied products
1. Rose oil or Rose perfume:It is obtained from rose petals which possess sweet fragrance,
medicinal properties and used in Ayurvedaas ant bactericide. Bulgarian rose otto is largely
used in perfuming soaps & cosmetics. Used in flavoring soft drinks and alcoholic liqueurs.
Species suitable: Rosa demascena, R. borboniana, R. centifolia, R. alba&R. gallica.
In India,R. demascena and R. borboniana are cultivated for rose oil.
2. Rose water: it is also prepared from petals of rose. Used for fragrance, medicine and
confectionary. Rose water is also used to cool the body, eye lotions, eye drops for its soothing
qualities and also used in drinking water. It is sprinkled on guests at weddings, feasts and
other social functions.
Species which are used for oil/perfume preparation is also suitable for rose water.
3. Gulkand: Rose petals are also preserved for direct consumption prepared by beating equal
proportion of petals and sugar.It is considered as good tonic and laxative.
Species suitable: R. damascene, R. chinensis, R. gallica
4. Pankhuri:Dried Rose petals are known as Pankhuri. They are occasionally used for
preparing sweetened cold drinks.
5. Gul-roghan: Rose petals are mixed with wet sesame seeds to prepare hair oil which is
known as Gul-roghan.
6. Rose syrup: Rose fruits are called as hips from which syrup is prepared. Rose hips are rich
in vitamin C (150 mg/100 g) which is 3 times higher than orange.
Species suitable: Rosa rugosa, Rosa glauca
Other products like Rose vinegar, rose petal wine, Jam, Jelly are prepared in Europe
countries.
Lecture 37
Jasmine - Species – Management practices
Scientific Name: (Jasminum sps.)
Family: Oleaceae
Jasmine is one of the important flower crops grown on commercial scale in
Rangareddy, Nalgonda, Mahabubnagar and Medak districts. The flowers are highly fragrant
and used for religious offerings and also used for preparing garlands. Loose flowers are also
used for extraction of essential oil which is used in the preparation of perfumes and scented.
Soil and Climate:Jasmine can be planted on a wide range of soils. Well-drained sandy loams
and red loams are ideal for its cultivation. In clayey soils, there is increased vegetative growth
and reduced flowering. They give good yield in low rainfall conditions. It is a tropical crop
and grows well in moderate humid conditions.
Varieties
Three species are commercially cultivated in Telangana
i)Jasminum sambac(Gundu malle/ Arabian jasminum/ Tuscan jasmine):Its flower buds are
white with single or multi whorled petals and Jasminum sambac is usually cultivated on
commercial jasmine. Important varieties are Gundumalle, Ramanadhapuram, Motia,
Virupakshi, Sujimalli, Madanabanam, Ramabanam.
ii)Jasminum auriculatum:Commonly known as ‘kakada’, The plants produce numerous star
shaped long flowers, white scented blooms are very good as loose flowers. The flowers are
commonly used for garlands, adorning hair, worship and decoration. It bears flowers from
spring to summer and in rainy season. Common varieties are.Co-1 Mullai,Co-2 Mullai,Long
Round,Short Point,Short Round.
iii) Jasminum grandiflorum:It produces fragrant flowers and flowers have a reddish tinge of
sepals and suitable for loose flowers and oil extraction. The flowers bloom during November
to February.
Propagation:Jasmine species are propagated by cuttings and layers.The rooting of cuttings
can be enhanced by using any of the rooting hormones like IBA (5000 ppm), IAA (1000
ppm) and NAA (5000 ppm). Simple and compound layering methods are followed during
June – July to October – November. Layers will be ready for planting within 90-120 days.
Planting:After ploughing the land, pits of about 40 x 40 x 40 cm size are dugout and filled
with topsoil and filled with 15 kg of well-rotten FYM.Planting distance depends on the
species and also on soil and environmental conditions.
Species Planting distance
J.sambac 1.2 x 1.2 m
J.auriculatum 1.8 x 1.8 m
J.multiflorum 1.5x 1.5 m
Planting is usually done during June – August.
Irrigation: Irrigation is most important factor for jasmines especially after pruning. Constant
and adequate water supply (irrigating twice a week) in light soils during peak flowering
season (March –October) is essential for high yield of flowers. After flowering is over, the
water supply can be cut off
Manures and Fertilizers:The plants are usually manured once in every year with organic
manures in January before flush season commences at 10-12 kg of FYM, 60-120 g N, 120 g
P O K Oper plant. The manures are usually applied after pruning the bushes once in June-
2 5& 2
July and again December-January.
Pruning: Flowers commences from tender shoots.With the approaching of winter the bushes
start to shed the leaves. To promote good flowering water is withheld in the 2nd fortnight of
November and allow plant to rest and shed the leaves or the plants are defoliated manually.In
Telangana the sheep herd is allowed to graze the leaves instead of manual defoliation which
not only saves labour costs but also improves the soil fertility by sheep castings.
Generally, pruning is done after 2 years of its planting and followed in the month of
December to January in Jasminum by removing all branches upto 45 to 50 cm from ground
level and roots should be exposed for few days. Before pruning irrigation is to be withheld
and all the dried and diseased twigs are to be removed. After pruning, the leaves are also to
be removed and irrigated lightly till flower buds appear. Profusely watering is done at regular
intervals after the appearance of flowers. Pruning time varies with the species as follows:
Species Time of pruning
Jasminum sambac February –March
Jasminum auriculatum
Jasminum multiflorum August –September
Harvest
The plants (layers) starts flowering from 2nd year after planting and the commercial yields
commence from third year onwards. The Jasminum sambac varieties flower profusely in
summer and also in rainy season (i.e. March-August) while Jasminum auriculatum flowers in
June-August, while Jasminum mutiflorum flowers during November to February.
Yield
Yield of flowers and jasmine oil vary according to the species and management practices.
Species Flower Yield (t/ac)
J.sambac 1.0-2.0
J.auriculatum 1.8-3.6
J.mutiflorum 1-2
Since the jasmine flowers are highly perishable and have to be disposed off in the market
within few hours after picking.
Lecture 38
Chrysanthemum – varieties – Management practices
Scientific Name: Chrysanthemum morifoliumRamat.
Family: Compositae
Chrysanthemum is one of the leading flowercrop mainly cultivated for its loose
flowers and recently it is gaining importance for its cut flower cultivation too.
Soil and Climate: Well drained, sandy loam soil with pH of 6.5-7.0 is ideal. It is highly
sensitive to waterlogged conditions. Chrysanthemum is a short day plant and for vegetative
growth it requires long day conditions with bright sunlight and high temperatures ranging
from 20 to 270C. It requires short day and low temperatures ranging from 10 to 270C for bud
formation and flowering.
Flower Types:Chrysanthemum flowers are classified by the kind and arrangement of florets
into five broad groups 1) Singles, 2) Anemones, 3) Pompons, 4) Decorative, 5) Large
flowered.
Varieties: All the cultivated types can be broadly classified into three groups.
1. The small flower type known as Nakshatra Chamanti or Kasturi Chamanthi
2. Medium flower types or PatnamChamanti and
3. Large flower types which are mostly used for flower decorations and for cut flowers.
Among these three types, there are variations in colour ranging between yellow to red
with different shades of admixture.In chrysanthemum, a number of hybrids, promising
varieties and locals are available for commercial cultivation.
The following varieties are suitable for loose flowers in Telangana state are
Yellow Basanthi, Punjab Anuradha, CO-1, Co-3, Yellow Gold, Silper, Raichur
White Ratlam selection, IIHR-13, IIHR-6, Baggi, Mother Theresa, PAU-107
Red Red stone , Red gold, Indira, Co-2
Small Button chrysanthemum
Popular local commercially cultivars are Sugandha white, Sugandha yellow,Marigold
,chandamama yellow, chanadamama white and violet types.
Propagation:Chrysanthemum is commercially propagated by terminal cuttings.Propagation
through suckers is discouraged since there will be transmission of viral diseases from parent
material and also there is no uniform flowering.
Terminal cuttings:The best time of raising nursey is May-June. Select terminal cuttings of
5-7 cm length from healthy stock plants. Dipthe terminal cuttings in 2500 ppm Indole butyric
acid (IBA) or any commercial formulations of rooting hormone and planted in raised nursery
beds or portrays for rooting. Drench the beds or trays with Bavistin @1g/l and spray Aliette
@1g/l to avoid soil borne diseases.The plants are ready for planting in 30-40days.
Planting Season:Chrysanthemum is a short day plant and flowers during cool season.The
best time for planting is June- July while, late varieties can be planted till August.However,
farmers plant in the month of 2nd fortnight of May so as to coincide flowering with festive
season.Flowering starts from September and continues till January.
Planting:Well rooted cuttings are planted in ridges at a spacing of 30 x 30 cm and 44,000
rooted terminal cuttings are required per acre.
Preparation of Land:Land is ploughed 3 to 4 times in March-April and 10 t/acre of
farmyard manure(FYM)is applied in the last ploughand the land is made into beds of
convenient size.
Manures and Fertilizers:During last plough, 10 t of FYM along with the recommended
fertilizers will be applied for one acre(60-80 kg of nitrogen, 32-40 kg P 0 and 60-80 kg K 0
2 2
which are to be applied as basal dose). At the time of first pinching Top dress the crop with
30 kg Nitrogen /acre. Foliar spray of ZnSO 0.25% + MgSO 0.5% is recommended.
4 4
Irrigation and Intercultivation: Irrigate the crop twice a week in the first month and
subsequently at weekly intervals. Irrigation depends on soil and weather conditions. Weeding
and hoeings’s generally done manually as and when required, normally 8-10 times. Mulching
can be takenup on raised bed under drip irrigation system. This not only avoids weeds but
also conserves the moisture.
Horticultural Practices:
i)Staking Staking is necessary for tall growing varieties.
ii)Pinchingis the removal ofterminal buds at 4weeks after planting to induce more side
shoots.This may be repeated on lateral shoots after 7weeks of planting.
iii)Desuckering: Remove the side suckers periodically.
Growth regulators application: Foliar Spray of GA @ 100-150 ppm gives flowers early by
3
15-20 and increases the number of blooms per plant, while application of 100 ppm NAA
before flower bud initiation delays blooming.
Harvesting: Depending on the variety, plants start yielding flowers after 3-4 months of
transplanting. The harvesting of the crop commences from September -January and lasts upto
February-March depending upon the time of planting. Fully opened flowers are to be plucked
by hand picking at 4 days interval with or without pedicel (stalk) for loose flowers purpose.
10-15 pickings can be taken up in a season.
Yield: 5-8 tons per acre of loose flowers.
After harvesting of the flowers, the plant is headed back to ground level. Application
FYM and SSP and well irrigation gives raise to suckers, these can be separated and planted.
Other practice is to taking terminal cuttings before removal of crop and placed in nursery.
Before placing it, dipping of the cuttings in 1 g carbendizum should be done. For better
rooting, cuttings are dipped in a hormonal solution of IBA 2500 ppm before planting in
nursery.
Lecture 39
Cultivation of Marigold and Crossandra – Management practices
Scientific name: Tagetes sp.
Family: Compositae
Marigold is one of the most important flowering annuals cultivated round the year. In
recent decades, its cultivation is gaining importance due to some advantages like easy culture
and wide adaptability, wide range of attractive colours, shape, size and good keeping quality.
Soil: It can be grown in a wide range of soils except water logged conditions. However, a
deep fertile soil having good water holding capacity, well drained, sandy loam soil rich in
organic matter is best suitable. Neither too acidic not too alkaline soil with pH 6.0 to 7.5 are
ideal.
Climate: Marigold requires mild climate for luxuriant growth and flowering. Depending on
environmental condition, planting of marigold is done in 3 three season’si.e rainy, summer
and winter. Staggered planting between 1st week of July to 1st week of February at monthly
intervals assures supply of flowers to market over an extended period from October to April,
while, maximum yield can be obtained from September planted crop.
Selection of site: A sunny location is ideal for marigold cultivation. Under shade, it produces
more vegetative growth and do not produce any flowers.
Types:
1. African marigold (Tagetes erecta): Plant height is tall with strong stem. Petals range
from single to multi with large sized flowers. Flowers are available in different shades of
lemon yellow – yellow, golden yellow to orange.
Varieties: Giant Double Yellow, Giant Double Orange, Arka Bangara-1, Arka Bangara-
2, Arka Agni,PusaNarangiGainda.
2. Frenchmarigold (Tagetes patula): it is a dwarf type and grows bushy. Petals range from
single to multi with small sized flowers.Flowers are available in yellow – orange, wheatish
red and a mixture of red, gold and yellow.
Varieties:PusaBasantiGainda, MDU -1.
Seed rate and sowing: 800-1000 g seed is required to plant one acre. Raised beds are
prepared with a dimension of 1 m width and convenient length. Before sowing, Folidol
powder to be applied to protect the seeds from ants. It takes 5-7 days for germination.
Season:
Season Sowing time Trasplanting time
Rainy End of June to 1st week of July First fortnight of august
Winter Mid of September Mid of October
Summer First week of January First week of February
Highest yields are obtained when planted in September. Rainfall during rainy season
and high temperatures during summer will affect the flower quality.
Propagation: Marigold is propagated through seed or herbaceous cuttings. Some varieties do
not set the seed where, cuttings are used for multiplication. Apical shoots of 10cm long are
usually used for vegetative propagation. Herbaceous cuttings each with one or two pair of
leaves are inserted in sand medium either in seed pan or nursery bed.Before putting the
cuttings in rooting medium the basal portion of the cuttings is treated with a hormone powder
which is marketed as Rootex-1 to encourage profuse and early rooting. Shade should be
provided initially to the beds. Regular watering should be done to keep the bed in moist
conditions. Within 8-10 days, rooting is observed in the cuttings which are later used as
planting materials.
Seed: Seeds can be sown on nursery beds in lines in shallow furrows. During preparation of
nursery beds 8-10 Kg of well decomposed FYM per sq.m bed is thoroughly mixed with the
soil. The width of the seed bed should not be more than 1.2m and height should be 15 cm.
Before sowing of seeds a little amount of folidol dust is applied to the nursery bed to avoid
ant or termite infestation. Seeds germinate 5-7 days after sowing.
Transplanting: Land should be ploughed 2 to 3 times to bring the soil to a fine tilth. One
month old seedlings with 3-4 leaves are fit for transplanting. Watering of nursery bed one day
prior to uprooting will lessen the damage to root system. Uprooting of seedlings and
transplanting should be done in the evening hours for better establishment.
Spacing: Seed Cuttings
1) African marigold 45 x 30cm 30 x 20 cm
2) French marigold 20 x 20cm 20 x 10 cm
Manures and Fertilizers: Incorporate 20 ton of Farm Yard Manure during the last plough.
Apply 20-40 kg N, 80 kg of P O and 80 kg of K O per acre. Half of nitrogen, entire dose of
2 5 2
phosphorus and potash should be applied as basal dose, preferably one week after
transplanting and rest half of nitrogen should be applied one month after the first application.
Irrigate after application.
Intercultural operations:Hoeing and weeding should be done 3 to 4 times during the crop
period to make the soil loose and weed free.
Irrigation:At all stages of vegetative growth (55-60 days) and during flower production
sufficient amount of moisture in the soil is essential. Moisture stress at any stage affects
normal growth and flowering.
Pinching: In tall cultivars of African marigold, plants first grow upwards to their final height
and later on produce a terminal flower. After the formation of terminal flower bud, axillary
branches develop which also bear flower. However, if the apical portion of shoot is removed
early, large number of axillary shoots arises resulting in well-shaped bushy plant bearing
more number of uniform sized flowers. Removal of apical portion of shoot is known as
pinching. It is observed that pinching at 40 days after transplanting enhances flower yield.
However, Giant double African yellow and orange do not require pinching as the plants are
bushy and branching type.
Harvesting: Marigold flowers are plucked when they attain full size. Harvesting should be
done either in the morning or evening hours. Field should be irrigated before 2 days of
harvesting of flowers so that the flowers keep well for longer period after harvest.
Yield:Yield of flowers varies with type and variety. Normally 4-6 ton flowers per acre can
be obtained.
CROSSANDRA (Crossandrainfundibuliformis)
Crossandrais one of the popular commercial loose flower preferred for their bright
colour, light-weight and long keeping quality.
Soil: Crossandra can be cultivated in a wide range of soils. Though fertile, red loamy soils
with pH range of 6 to 7.5 and rich in organic matter are ideal for its cultivation.Avoid
nematode infested soils and high alkaline soils.
Varieties:Lutea yellow, Sebaculas Red, Orange yellow, ArkaAmbara and Arka Shreya.
Propagation:its propagation isthrough seeds or stem cuttings though seed is ideal for its
commercial cultivation.Seeds are sown in May-June in raised beds. About 2 to 2 ½ kg of
seeds is required per ha. The seeds loose viability very soon and hence only freshly extracted
seeds should be used.Treat the seeds with mancozeb or carbendazim @ 2g/kg. To avoid
damping off disease, nursery beds are drenched with wettable ceresin or captan@ 1g/l. When
the seedlings develop 3-4 leaves they are ready for transplanting. The seedlings are
transplanted at a spacing of 60x40cm. Before planting, it is better to dip the roots of the
seedlings in wet Ceresan solution to prevent the incidence of wilt disease. The seedlings will
be ready for transplanting within 50-60 days after sowing. In the case of triploid varieties like
Delhi, Arkaambara,Arkashreya cuttings are used. Cuttings should be transplanted when
sufficient roots have developed.
Preparation of Land: The land is ploughed 4-6 times and ridges and furrows are made at a
spacing of 60 cm and seedlings are transplanted on the sides of the ridges at 40 cm apart.
Manuring:Farmyard manure @ 8 t/acre is applied during last plough. The crop is top dressed
3-4 times with 14-24-24 kg per acre of N: P O : K O each time, at 3,6,9 and 15 months after
2 5 2
transplanting. Application of Zinc sulphate @ 5gm/lat 60 days after transplanting increases
the flower yield and quality. Application of fertilizers is to be necessarily followed by
irrigation.
Irrigation: Immediately after planting, the crop has to be irrigated twice a week and later
irrigation is to be provided at 7-10 days interval based on climate and soil conditions. Dried
flower stalks and branches are to be removed at regular intervals.
Harvest and yield:In Crossandra flowering starts within two to three months after planting
and continues to bear flowers throughout the year with a lean production during rainy
months. Flowers are to be picked early in the morning by pulling the corolla out of the calyx.
Six pickings can be taken in a year. An average yield of 5 to 7 kg of flowers can be obtained
at each picking. Flowers are very light in weight, which accounts around 1500 flowers per kg.
Harvesting of flowers is to be done on alternate days.
Lecture 40
Greenhouse cultivation of flowers -techniques
The technique of providing favorable environment condition for plant growth by means of
controlling temperature, light, relative humidity and other factors to facilitate microclimate
requirement of plants in order to obtain quality produce in a covered structure is known as
greenhouse technology.
Classification of greenhouses: greenhouses are classified based on different factors such as
based on shape, type of cladding material used and environmental control. Considering the
environmental control greenhouses are classified as low cost, medium cost and high cost.
High cost greenhouses are constructed for cultivation of vegetables and flowers for export
purpose. In our region, low and medium cost greenhouses are suitable for successful
cultivation.
Advantages of greenhouse cultivation of crops:
✓ High yield per unit area and superior quality produce free of blemishes.
✓ Possible to cultivate throughout the year.
✓ Offseason cultivation of flowers.
✓ Water and fertilizers are utilized effectively.
Suitable crops for greenhouse cultivation: low volume crops like Rose, Gerbera,
Carnation, Anthurium/ and Orchids.
Planning and design of Greenhouse: construction of greenhouse should be according to the
area and crops to be grown however, it should be permissible ample light required for the
crop.
Orientation: single span greenhouses are constructed in any direction though the multi span
green houses are constructed in North -South direction only to avoid shadow of the structure
at one place.
Parts of green house:low cost green houses consists of frame and roof whereas in medium
cost green houses in addition to these, environmental control equipment/s are also there
which involves additional cost. Generally, Green house frame lasts for 15-20 years, roof for
3-6 years and control/monitoring equipment for 5-10 years depends on the management and
quality.
Types in green house construction: there are two types of construction.
1. Single span green house: this a single unit and can be of any shape i.e., Quonset, gothic,
gable, dome. These are constructed in 100-500 m2.
2. Multi span green house: gutter connected multi span ridge and furrow greenhouses are
suitable for cultivation crops which are similar environmental conditions.
Construction of green house:
a. fabrication of frame:according to size and durability mild steel or galvanized iron pipes
of 0.5 -1.5 mm diameter are used for frame. Cost of these are lesser than aluminium angles.
In low cost green houses, temperature requirement is met by providing ventilation in natural
way hence height should be of 3.5 m for 100 m2area , for the greenhouses of 500m2 or more
5-7 m height is required. Ventilation is provided by employing top and side ventilators.
Polyhouse area of 100 m2 is sufficient for propagation unit and for cultivation of flowers on
commercial scale 300 -500 m2 area is sufficient.
b. frame cladding/roof:different cladding material like glass, fibre glass, polythene are used.
However, U.V stablilized polythene of 200 microns (800 gauge) are suitable.
c. environmental control system:for natural control of temperature, to provide ventilation of
60-70%, side ventilators are arranged with 40 mesh net and upon the need roll up polythene
film should also be arranged. In medium cost green houses, temperature controlling is carried
by providing evaporative cooling system by exhaust fans and cellulose pads.
Management of green house environment:
a. Temperature control: day and night temperature should be controlled based on the
requirement of crop.
Cooling of greenhouse:if the inside temperature exceeds than the tolerance limitsof crop it
should be cooled. It is achieved by
a.Natural ventilation:it works on the physical phenomenon that warm air is less dense and
rises which creates small pressure differences between outside and inside the house and the
inside air blows out. For natural ventilation 20-50%floor area should be provided.
b. Forced ventilation: in this ventilation is achieved through mechanical means by
employing fans, lowers and vents.Lowers are works manually or mechanically. Mechanical
lowers are also helps in protection of greenhouses especially during high windy time.
c. Exhaust ventilation: in this system arrangement is made for installation of more number
of inlets. In single span green houses air movement of 30 m and in multi span houses it
should be of 60 m. fans are fitted at one end and the inlets are arranged on the other end.
2. Roof shading: it is a process of cooling to reduce the amount of solar radiation which
reaches the plant. By reducing the solar load on the green house, the air temperature
difference is smaller, making the absolute air temperatures inside the green house closer to
the outside temperature. Traditionally, it is done by applying a semi permanent shading
compound like
1 kg white lead/ Zinc/ Tilanium paint
1 kg whitening, 41/2 spoons linseed oil, 8 l gasoline or naphta paints (to control fire)
Another way of shading is achieved by attaching a black polypropylene mesh screening on
the outer glazing. Shading can be obtained from 30-92%. internal shading works in similar
way of shade curtains.
3.Evaporative cooling system:it works on the principle of evaporation. In this, fans and pad
are arranged on opposite walls. Fans should deliver required air at 15 mm static pressure. The
maximum distance between two fans should be of 7.5 m. height of fans should be determined
based on the plant height which is proposed to be grown. Fan blades and frames are to be
made of non-corrosive materials like aluminium / stainless steel.
The cross fluted cellulose pad is preferred. These are available mostly in 100 mm thickness.
One meter of pad height is given for every 20 m of pad to fan distance. However, the fan to
pad distance should not exceed 60m. the air flow rate should be of 75 cubic
meter/minute/sq.m of pad. Water flow rate should be of 9 l/min/linear meter pad. Uniform
distribution of water on pad is to be maintained.
4. Water and nutrient management: crops cultivated ingreenhouse required less water
when compared to outside crop. In green house water is applied through drip or micro
sprinkler system. It also facilitates for supply of fertilizers through drip which are applied
from fertigation tanks based on the need of the crop.
Lecture 41
Importance of preservation of fruits and vegetables – important
considerations
India ranks 2nd in production in fruits and vegetables. Though the export share of fruits and
vegetables is <1 % and annually it is around 150 mt. 30-35% of the produce is getting lost
before it reaches to consumers due to improper storage, lack of awareness on scientific
technology. Preservation of fruits and vegetables deals with minimization of spoilage,
processing, storage and preservation of the products for future uses.
Importance of preservation of fruits and vegetables:
❖ Fruits and vegetables are perishable in nature. There is a need to preserve them to
utilize for more days.
❖ Most of the fruits available in one season.
❖ Preservation of fruits is necessary to utilize them in off season too.
❖ It is possible to supply fruits, vegetables and their products from production areas to
non-production areas if preservation is done.
❖ It is also possible to get higher price when there is demand in market during off
season through proper storage of the produce obtained during on season.
❖ Higher foreign exchange can be earned from by products prepared from fruits and
vegetables.
Reasons for non-development of preservation of fruits and vegetables:
❖ Lack of scientific knowledge on preservation of fruits and vegetables.
❖ Non availability of sufficient quantity of fruits and vegetables for preservation.
❖ Higher cost involved in preservation process i.e., machinery, cans etc.
❖ Lack of awareness on government subsidies available for storage, processing etc., to
the farmers.
❖ Lack of transport facilities and marketing system for preserved products.
❖ Non availability of ample quantity of raw material to supply for processing industries
due to non-production of fruits and vegetables throughout the year.
Reasons for spoilage of fruits:
❖ Improper harvesting, packing and transport of fruits.
❖ High temperatures
❖ High respiration
❖ Due to some enzymes like pectinase, hydrolytic
❖ Spoilage due to yeast and bacteria
❖ Due to catalytic activity of enzymes which enhances ripening and also reduces the
quality of fruits.
Control methods for spoilage of fruits:
❖ Higher respiration rate is reduced by storing the fruits at cool temperatures.
❖ Hot water treatment followed by fungicidal treatment (0.1%) reduces the fungal
infestation in humid areas.
❖ Yeast growth can be checked and controlled by syruping fruits at 60-65%
concentration (sugar).
❖ Spoilage bacteria not only spoils the product and also causes swelling, leakage of
the containers and gives offensive odour which can be reduced by pasteurization.
❖ Bacterial growth is arrested at pH of 4-7.5 and its growth is stopped in high acidic
pH. By pasteurization at 1000C vegetative growth of bacteria is stopped since for
spores of fungi needs > 1000 C.
Lecture 42
Role of microbes in spoilage of stored food products – other reasons for
spoilage
1. Nonpoisonous spoilage: when the foods are sterilized at low temperatures this kind of
spoilage occurs through yeast and leads to swelling of cans.
2. Poisonous spoilage: this kind of spoilage is due to thermophilic bacteria. Mostly occurs in
pasty materials like sweet potato. There is no swell in cans due to non-production of gases.
Spoilage due to physical and chemical reactions:
1.Biological:it is due to some enzymes present in foods and it can be checked by removal of
excess gas.
2. Metallic contamination:
a). Ferric tannins: tannins present in fruits and vegetables are readily act with the iron present
in containers and gives black colour to the foods.
Example: Grapes, Pomegranate
b). Iron sulphide: proteins present in foods rotten and release Sulphur di oxide further it acts
with acids present in foods and reacts with cans subsequently produces hydrogen gives black
colour to the foods.
c). Copper sulphide: foods react with the containers made of copper changes the food colour.
d). Hydrogen: acids present in fruits reacts with cans and produces concentrated hydrogen,
this gas further reacts with red and purple fruits and spoils. It canbe minimized by using
lacquered cans.
3. Anthocyanins present in fruits and vegetables with various reactionsleads to colour change
of foods.
4. Oxygen present in containers reacts with the acids present in fruits and combines with
hydrogen and leads to deteriorates the cans.
Generally, the canned foods are get spoiled by faulty storage practices. This spoilage may be
occurred with the physical and chemical actions of microorganisms and gives offensive odour
and taste.
3. Swell: Whenthe ends of an apparently normal and perfect can with good vacuum become
bulged is termed as swell or blower. The bulge is due to the positive internal pressure of
gases formed by microbial or chemical action. different types of swell occurs as follows:
i) Hydrogen swell: this is due to the hydrogen gas produced by the action of food
acids on the metal of the can. The food generally remains free of harmful
microorganisms and it is fit for consumption.
ii) Flipper: The can appears normal, but when struck against a tabletop one or both
ends become convex and springs or flips out, but can be pushed back to normal
condition by a little pressure. It may be caused by overfilling, under-exhausting or
gas pressure due to spoilage.
iii) Springer: A mild swell at one or both ends of a can is called a Springer. Which is
initial stage of hydrogen swell or be due to insufficient exhausting or overfilling
of the can.
iv) Leakage: a leakagecan is known as “Leaker”. This may be due to internal or
external corrosion and mechanical damage during handling.
v) Breather: theremay be a very tiny leak in the can through which air can pass in
and destroy the vacuum. In such cases the food is damaged due to rusting of the
can caused by oxygen in the air but still remains fit for consumption.
vi) Bursting: this may be caused by the excess pressure of gases produced by
decomposition of the food by microorganisms, or by hydrogen gas formed by the
chemical action of food acids on the tin plate. In such cases the canned product
cannot be used.
Microbial spoilage:
Flat sour: this occurs mostly in non-acid foods like vegetables and is caused by
thermophilic species of Bacillus, which produce acid without formation of gas. The
product has a sour odour and its acidity is much higher than that of the normal product. It
is not fit for consumption.
Lecture 43
Preservation of fruits at family level – Zero Energy Cool Chamber
Methods of preservation:
Temporary methods:microbial growth can be checked or stopped to certain extent but not
completely. Some measures like do not damage the fruits while harvesting, use of cleaned
containers for storage and straining of fruit juice through germ proof filter are to be taken at
family level.
1. Freezing: storage at lowtemperature increases the keeping quality of fruits and also
minimizes respiration and microbial growth.
Refrigeration 0-50C, freezing 10-140C
2.Removal of moisture: moisture favours the growth of microorganisms hence removal of
moisture helps in reduction of spoilage of fruits.
Drying: moisture can be removed by drying under sun.
Dehydration: moisture removal is by artificial methods.
3. Absorption of water (moisture): by employing salt and sugar solution microbial growth
can be arrested and also removes moisture from fruits.
Sugar – 70% Salt- 15-20%
4.Use of chemical preservatives: So and benzoic acids are used as preservatives. So in the
2 2
form of Potassium meta bi sulphate used for colourless foods while Benzoic acid in the form
of Sodium Benzoate is used for preservation of coloured foods.
5. Pasteurization: heating foods at <1000C stops the microbial growth and helps in storage
of foods.
Foods can be stored in air tight containers.
Permanent methods: in this method microbial growth can be stopped completely thereby
foods can be stored.
1. Sterilization: heating foods at >1000C completely kills the microorganisms. This type of
foods are stored in air tight containers.
2. Fermentation:some of the microorganism’s favours for storage of foods.These can be
used in various types of fermentations.
a). Alcohol fermentation:yeast is responsible for fermentation which converts sugars into
alcohol. 14% alcohol acts as strong preservative. Storage of foods depends on the alcohol
percentage. These foods are to be stored in air tight containers.
Example: Grape wine, Apple cider, Feni
yeast
Sugar → Alcohol + Co
2
b). Acetic acid fermentation: 2% acetic acid (vinegar) is used for preservation of fruits mainly
used in pickles and ketchup preparations. In this method, foods are preserved by using
bacteria which releases acetic acid.
c). Lactic acid fermentation: fermentation is done by lactic acid bacteria mainly used for
sugar-based products. it is used in the preparation of cabbage pickles.
Zero Energy Cool Chamber:fruits and vegetables are perishable in nature and the fresh
produce is getting spoilage due to the lack of on farm storage which accounts huge lost to the
farmers. Cold storage can prolong the life of fresh produce, but the cost to buy the equipment,
run and maintain involves high investment. This can be overcome by construction of low cost
zero energy cool chamber which stays 10-150C cooler and retains 90% relative humidity. It
works on the principle of direct evaporative cooling. Cooling effect obtained by evaporation
of water and faster the evaporation, greater is the cooling. Cool temperatures strew
respiration process, allowing fresh produce for longer time and avoid spoilage.
Construction: the zero energycool chambercan be constructed easily with materials like
brick, sand, bamboo, straw, gunny bags etc. it is most effective during the dry season. The
materials primarily used in constructing these chambers i.e. bricks and sand both has great
capacity to absorb and retain water which evaporates slowly and steadily depending on the
atmospheric temperature and humidity resulting in cooling.
Advantages: Better marketability
Retain nutritive value
Environment friendly storage system with no pollution
Ideal for household storage
Lecture 44
Cottage industries of fruits - Techniques
Certain by products can be prepared from fruits at small and cottage industries. The following
are the different by products:
1. Jam: It is a Product Prepared from pulp of the fruits after cooking with sufficient quantity
of sugar to a reasonably thick consistency. Jam contains 0.5 to 0.6% acid (as per FPO), 68%
TSS and 45% portion of prepared fruit.
Suitable fruits: Mango, Guava, Papaya, Pineapple, Sapota and other pulpy fruits.
2) Jelly: Jelly is a semi-solid transparent product prepared from clear extract of pectin
containing fruit after cooking with sufficient quantity of sugar. Jelly contains 0.5-0.75% acid
(as per FPO), 65 % TSS and 45% portion of fruit juice.
Suitable fruits: Guava, Papaya, grape, oranges, jamun, woodapple and other pectin
containing fruits.
3) Marmalade: It is a product prepared from citrus fruits after cooking pulp or juice of fruits
with sufficient sugar and using shreds of peel as a suspended material. When the product is
prepared from pulp of fruit and is solid in consistency, it is termed as jam marmalade.
Whereas, the product prepared from clear extract of fruit is termed as jelly marmalade.
Suitable fruits: sweet oranges, sour oranges, mandarin oranges
4)Squash: It is a concentrated beverage prepared from juice of fruits after mixing it with
strained sugar syrup and preservative.
Suitable fruits: Orange, Mango, jamun, muskmelon, watermelon and other juicy fruits.
5) Fruit beverages: Theseareeasily digestible, highly refreshing, appetizing and nutritionally
far superior to many synthetic and aerated drinks. They are classified into two groups.
i)Unfermented beverages: Fruit juices which do not undergo alcoholic fermentation are
termed as unfermented beverages.They include natural and sweetened juices, RTS, nectar,
cardial.
Again the juices are two types I) Natural juices (Pure juices) it is the juice as extracted from
ripe fruits and contains natural sugars. II) Sweetened juice, isa liquid product which contains
at least 85% juice and 10 % total soluble solids.
ii) Fermented beverages:Fruit juices which have undergo alcoholic fermentation by yeast
include wine, champaigne, cidar, nira, etc.
Champaigne – grape juice of France
Sherry - grape juice of Spain
Nira – Juice of Date Palm, Toddy Palm
Feni – prepared from Cashew apple
6) Cardial: it is a fruit juice without any pulp and is clear, transparent and shiny.
7) Sherbat or Syrup: It is a sweetened juice with added sugar and aroma artificially which is
similar to that of natural fruits.
POST HARVEST HANDLING OF FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
Canning/ Bottling: Foods which are filled in air tight containers and heated to kill the
harmful microbes is known as canning /bottling. Before canning some of the precautions
have to be taken as follows:
1. Selection of fruits and vegetables: Fruits and vegetables should be firm and fresh, pest
and disease free while, avoid using over ripen fruits/ vegetables and damaged one.
Peeling: it is done either manually or mechanically.
Advantages: 1. Improves taste of the food.
2. Fruits and vegetables absorbs most of the sugar or salt which acts as preservative.
3. Absorbs much of the heat at the time of canning.
Hand peeling – done in irregular fruits like Mango, Papaya with the help of knife
Mechanical peeling – Potato, Beetroot
Peeling by heat – Tomato, Peaches
Lye peeling – done by dipping in caustic soda (1-2%) for 30 seconds to 2 minutes in
Carrot, Sweet potato
Cutting: Pieces of the requiredsize for canning are cut. Seed, stone and core are removed.
Some fruits like plum from which the seeds cannot be taken out easily are canned whole.
Blanching: Treatment of fruits and vegetables with boiling water or steam for short periods
(2-5 min) followed by cooling prior to canning is called blanching. The main purpose
ofblanching is to soften the texture and to enable a greater weight to be pressed in to the
container without damage to the individual fruit.
Advantages of blanching: Blanching loosens the skin and removes gases and sulphides. It
also inactivates the enzymes thus prevents the discoloration by removing undesirable acid
elements.incase of leafy greens it improves colour and enhances taste and aroma by removing
astringent taste and saponins (peas).
Disadvantagesof blanching: sugars and colour of the fruits and vegetables get dissolved in
water. Vitamin C gets lost.
Can filling: Thoroughly washed and sterilized cans are to be used for filling with fruit or
vegetable. Plain cans are generally used. In case of coloured fruits like, black grapes, straw
berries, etc. fruit lacquered cans are employed.
Syruping or brining: The loaded cans are filled with hot sugar syrup for fruit and with hot
brine for vegetables. It improves the taste of the canned product and fills up the interspaces
between fruits or vegetables in the can. The syrup or the brine should be added to the can at a
temperature of 79OC to 82OC.
Syrup- sugar solution (20-55%)
Brine – Salt solution (1-3%)
Lidding or clinching: the filled cans are covered with lid which is partially seamed to the
can by a single first roller action of a double seamer.The lid remains sufficiently loose to
permit the escape of the dissolved as well as free air from the contents and also the vapour
formed during exhaust process.
Exhausting: The process of removal of all the air from the contents before final sealing of
the can is known as exhausting. Exhausting reduces the oxidation of the product, also helps in
better retention of Vitamins especially Vitamin, C. The tendency of fruits and vegetables to
expand or shrivel during heating, the exhaust process will be of assistance in avoiding over
filling or under filling of the can. The other advantages of exhaust process are prevention of
bulging of can when stored at high altitudes or in hot climates. At the end of exhaust the
temperature at the centre of the can should be about 79OC.In case of glass jars, vacuum
closing machines are generally used. The jar is placed in a closed chamber in which high
vacuum is maintained.
Sealing: After exhausting, the cans are sealed air tight by double seamers and the temperature
of the filled cans should not reach be below 740C.
Processing: It means heating or cooling of canned foods to inactivate bacteria. Over cooking
should be avoided as it spoils the flavour and product appearance. Generally, almost all fruits
can be processed satisfactorily at 1000C temperature while, vegetables, which are non-acidic
(except the acidic tomato) required to be processed at high temperatures of about 1150C to
1210C.
Cooling: After processing the cans are cooled rapidly to stop the cooking process and to
prevent stack burning.
Labelling, Storing and Packing: The outer surface of the can should be dried perfectly. The
cans are then labelled and packed in strong wooden cases or corrugated card board cartons, in
standard packings.They should be stored in a cool dry place.
Containers for canning:
Tin and glass containers have so far been successfully employed for canning foods. In recent
years plastic containers and heat sealable pouches are being tried as possible substitutes for
the familiar tin and glass containers. Although the tin containers are more common in use
since these are fabricated readily and are strong enough to withstand processing, they are
light in weight, easy to handle and fairly cheap, they can be handled in highspeed machines.
Glass containers are fragile and require extra care in handling and during processing.
However, they possess advantages over the tin cans, the contents being visible can be easily
displayed and the containers can be used over and over again
Lacquering: Small microscopic spaces are always left uncoated in steel plates with tin.
Further, these may react with the contents of the can and cause discoloration of the product or
corrosion of the tin plate, when corrosion issevere, the steel is attacked and black stains of
iron sulphide are produced. It is therefore necessary to coat the inside of the can with some
material is known as lacquering. This is achieved by lacquers which are two types viz., acid
resistant and sulphur resistant.
Acid resistant cans: Acid resistant lacquer is ordinary gold coloured enamel, and the cans
when treated with it, are called R- enamel cans. These are used for canning fruits and
vegetables of acid group with soluble colouring matter.
Ex: Pineapple, Grapes, Strawberry
Sulphur resistant cans: This lacquer is also of golden coloured enamel, and the cans coated
with it, are called C-enamel cans (Or) S.R Cans. These cans are used for non-acid products
like peas, corn, beans etc.
Lecture 45
Preparation Fruit Juice, Squash – Preservatives used for storage
Preparation of Juice and Squash
Generally, juice and squash are prepared from juicy fruits.
Example: Mango, Orange, Grapes, Phalsa
Preparation of juice and squash are similar except that in preparation of juice, pulp is
separated and strained to obtain juice and in squash juice is not strained.
Note: lime salt is not necessary to add for lemon squash
Lecture 46
Preparationof Jam and Jelly
Fruits are seasonal and these are available in particular season and preservation of fruits is
important to supply during off season. Different kind of by products can be prepared
fruits of which Jam and Jelly are popular among all those.
Preparation of Jam:
Jam is a product made by boiling fruit pulp with sufficient quantity of sugar to a reasonably
thick consistency, firm enough to hold the fruit tissues in position. It can be prepared from
one kind of fruit or from two or more kinds. In its preparation about 45% of fruit pulp should
be used for every 55% of sugar. The FPO specification of jam is 68.5% TSS, 45% of fruit
pulp and 0.5 -0.6% of acid (citric acid) per 100 gm of the prepared product.
Material required:
• Fruits (Apple, Papaya, Guava, Pineapple, Mango, Sapota)
• Sugar -2kg
• Citric acid essence (50 grams)
• Sodium benzoate – 0.1 g
• Glass bottles 3
• Essence 5-6 drops
Preparation:
Selection of fruits: Select just ripe fruits having good colour, flavor and aroma. Unripe
immature fruits should not be used as the product will be tough. Wash the fruits in running
water. Remove stems and leaves, if any. Trim the bruised and blemished portions.
Preparation of fruits: Peel the fruit and remove any stones, seed and cores. Cut the fruit into
small pieces. If the fruit is tough and hard, boil it in water to soften it. Crush the fruit pulp to
form into a uniform thick mass.
Addition of sugar: Amount of sugar is depends on the sweetness of the fruits. To the sour
fruits, add an equal quantity of sugar by weight of fruit pulp and for the sweeter varieties, add
only 75 % of sugar by weight.
Addition of preservatives: Sodium benzoate at 0.1 g and required amount of citric acid to be
added to the product.
Mixing: Mix the fruit pulp and sugar thoroughly and allow the mixture to stand for half to
one hour so that the sugar dissolves in the juice released from the fruit.
Cooking: Cook the mixture slowly with continuous stirring and crushing till the temperature
reaches 105.50C or till the cooking mass approaches the desired consistency. When the mass
has been boiling and has become sufficiently thick in consistency, dip a spoon into it and let
the product run of the sides of the spoon. If the product falls off in the form of a sheet instead
of flowing readily in a single stream, it means the end point has been reached and the product
is ready for filling into containers. The end point can also be determined by cold plate test
and sheet and fibre test.
Filling and cooling: Fill the hot jam into a clean dry jar or can placed on the insulating
material like a wooden board to prevent the breakage of glass jar. Close the filled container
without delay.
Storage: Allow the jar to cool. Store the container in a cool dry place.
Sealing: Pour molten paraffin wax on the closed jam surface to prevent air contact.
Flow chart of Jam Preparation:
Ripe firm fruits
Washing
Peeling
Pulping (remove seed and core)
Addition of sugar and acid
Boiling (with continuous stirring)
Judging of end point by further cooking upto 1050C (or) 68% TSS
(or) by sheet test
Filling into sterilized bottles
Cooling
addition of preservative and permitted colours
Filling into sterilized bottles
Cooling
Waxing
Capping
Store at ambient temperature
Preparation of Jelly from Jam: fruits which are rich in pectin (Guava) are used for jelly
preparation. Fruits are cut into small pieces and are cooked to extract juice. Further the
extracted juice is to cook till it becomes firm and thicker than jam. Finally, Jelly test is
done with brix reading when brix reading is 92%, cooking process has to be stopped and
of 750 g sugar and 60-80 g citric acid and 5-6 drops essence is to be added (if required).
Flow chart of Jelly Preparation:
Lecture 47
Preparation of Sauce and Ketchup
Sauce and Ketchup: Tomato products such as Sauce, Ketchup are commonly consumed
with food and snacks. Tomato is a valuable raw material used for processed products such as
juice, puree and paste, ketchup /sauce and canned whole.
Tomato ketchup is common and popular product which is made by concentrating
tomato pulp without seeds and skin. Spices, salt, sugar, vinegar, onion, garlic, etc. are added
to the extent that the ketchup contains not less than 12 per cent tomato solids and 28 per cent
total solids. The preparation of ketchup and sauce are almost same except the concentration.
Sauce contains 30 % of total solids and that of ketchup has 28% total solids. Other fruits and
vegetables such as Apple, Papaya, Soybean, Mushroom can also be used for preparation of
Sauce and Ketchup.
Flow chart:
Lecture 48
Dehydrated Foods
It is a traditional practice that excess quantities of fruits and vegetables are dried and
stored. The principle involved in this process is removal of water from fruits and vegetables.
It can be done by two ways.
1. Artificially dehydration is done at a temperature or by inducing hot air in a
dehydrator. Initially the temperature of dehydrator maintained at 430C later it is
increased to 60-60 0C (vegetables), (66-710C (fruits)
Dehydration Sun drying
➢ It can be possible throughout the year. Can be possible only during summer.
➢ Requires small area. Needs larger area for drying.
➢ Quality of the product is good Poor quality products.
➢ It takes less time for completion. Needs longer time.
➢ Products prepared in this method are Maintaining of hygienic conditions is difficult
clean and hygienic
➢ Less labour cost. Labour is more
➢ Products prepared from this method Can be stored for short time
can be stored for longer period
➢ The products contains less colour Remains good colour
➢ Initial investment is high Investment is not needed
Scope and importance of dehydrated foods:
1.Compared to other processed foods, it is easy to prepare and less cost involved in
dehydrated foods.
2. Sugar or other sugar based materials are not needed.
3. There is a weight reduction of ¼ to 1/9 in case of dehydrated foods which facilitates for
easier transportation and cut down the cost involved for transportation.
4. It is easy to supply the dehydrated foods to hilly areas.
5. Requires less area for its storage.
6. Excess quantity of fruits or vegetables can be utilized during offseason by processing
through dehydration.
Fruits
Ex: Mango – Amchur
Orange powder
Arils of pomegranate – Anardana
Vegetables:
Ex: Moringa leaf powder, Curry leaf powder, Onion powder.
Dehydrated flakes of Tomato, Bhendi, Cucumber, Bitter gourd, cluster bean
Fruits/vegetables – Dehydrated Foods (Flow chart)
Selection of healthy, pest and disease free fruits/vegetables
Wash Wash to remove adhered soil/bremises
Peeling
Cut into small pieces according to the selected fruits/vegetables
Blanching
Filtering of water and spreading as thin layer
Sulphuring (1.8-3.6 kg/1 t fruits)
Drying (sun drying or dehydration)
Sweating (to obtain uniform moisture of the dehydrated product)
Packing (in air tight containers/ polythene bags)
Storage (at room temperature and in dried place)
