PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE AGRICULTURAL
UNIVERSITY
Land Surveying, Water Engineering and
Green House Technology
(Course No. DA-252 )
Course No. DA-252 3(2+1)
Land Surveying, Water Engineering and Green house Technology
Theory Lecture Outlines
S.No. Topic Page No.
1 Basic formulas in measurements- Basic units of length, area and volumes 1-2
2 Surveying – definition and objectives of survey, Types of Surveying.
3 Measurements of distance
4 Chain survey
5 Cross-Staff and Optical Square working Mechanism
6 Errors in chaining/surveying obstruct
7 Main lines, offsets in surveying
8 Field notes
9 Triangulation survey area Identification
10 Offset Survey
11 Offset Survey Area Identification problems
12 Compass survey- Prismatic Compass.
13 Concept of Meridian, True Median, -Bearing, Reduced Bearing-Fore and
Back Bearing
14 Compass Surveying-Problems
15 Soil and water conservation
16 Crop-Water Management
17 Crop-Water Management-Problems
18 Irrigation Methods
19 Sprinkler Method of Irrigation
20 Drip Irrigation Method -Introduction-Advantages
21 Pumps –Centrifugal pumps working method
22 Submersible pumps
23 Losses due to friction in pumps Problems
24
25 Irrigation water Measuring devises
26 Green houses, advantages of green houses.
27 Brief description of types of green houses, greenhouses based on shape,
utility, construction, covering materials and cost, shade nets.
28 Plant growth greenhouse environment
29 Plant response to greenhouse environments
30 Carbon dioxide Enrichment and Ventilation
31 Computers use in Green Houses and Equipment required for controlling
green house environment – summer cooling and winter cooling systems
32 Green house construction
Lecture No. 1
Basic formulas-measurements, Basic units of length, area and volumes
1. Area and Perimeter of Rectangle 4. Area and Perimeter of Trapezoid
2. Area of Parallelogram
5. Circumference (C) of a Circle and
Area (A) of a Circular Region
3. Area and Perimeter of
Triangle 6. Volume and Surface Area of a
Right Circular Cylinder
1
7. Volume and Surface Area of a Sphere
2
2
Lecture No. 2
Surveying & Levelling. Surveying– definition and objectives of survey, primary divisions of surveying,
geodetic and plane surveys, classification, uses of surveys.
1. Surveying It is the art of determination of horizontal distances, differences in elevation,
directions, angles, locations, areas and volumes on or near the surface of the earth. It involves the
measurement and recording of the size and shape (including the vertical shape) of an area on the
earth‟s surface. The process of survey divided into two parts:
(a) Field work- taking measurements
(b) Office work- computing and drawing
1.1 Object of survey :
The primary object of survey is the preparation of plan or map. The results of surveys
when plotted and drawn on paper constitute a plan. A plan is, the representation to some
scale, of the ground and the objects upon it as projected on a horizontal plane, which is
represented by the plane of the paper on which the plan is drawn. The representation is called
a map, if the scale is small. If the scale is large, it is called a plan. On plan, only horizontal
distances are shown. The scale of a map is the fixed relation that, every distance on the map
bears to the corresponding distance on the ground. Suppose, if one cm on a map represents 5
m on the ground, the scale of a map is 5m to 1 cm.
1.2 Primary division of surveying
Surveying may be divided into two general classes:
(a) Geodetic surveying
(b) Plane surveying
1.2.1 Geodetic surveying
It is also called trigonometrically surveying. The object of a geodetic surveying is to
determine the precise positions on the surface of the earth of a system of widely distant
points and the dimensions of areas. In this survey, the curvature of the earth is taken into
account, since large distances and areas are covered. Artificial earth satellites have come
into wide use in this survey.
1.2.2 Plane surveying
In this survey, the earth‟s surface is considered as a plane. The curvature of the earth is
not taken into account, as the surveys extend only to small areas. The line joining any two
points as a straight line, and all angles are plane angles. Surveys normally carried out for the
location and construction of roads, canals and, buildings. In general, the surveys necessary
for the works of man are plane surveys.
3
Types of Surveying
1.3 Classification: Surveys may be classified in a variety of ways.
I. Classification based upon the nature of the field of survey:
(a) Land Surveys.
(b) Marine or Navigation Surveys.
(c) Astronomical Surveys.
II. Classification upon the object of survey:
(i) Archaeological surveys.
(ii)Geological Surveys -for determining different strata in the earth‟s crust.
(iii) Mine Surveys- for exploring mineral wealth such as gold, coal, etc.
(iv) Military Surveys- for determining points of strategic importance both offensive and
defensive.
III. Classification based upon the methods employed in survey:
(a) Triangulation Surveys.
(b) Traverse Surveys.
IV. Classification based upon the instrument employed:
(i) Chain Surveys.
(ii)Theodolite Surveys.
(iii)Tacheometric Surveys.
(iv) Compass Surveys.
(v) Plane Table Surveys.
(vi) Photographic and Aerial Surveys.
1.4 Agricultural surveying It is a simple plane surveying. It includes laying out contour and
terrace lines for soil conservation, drainage lines, profile lines for land leveling and ditch
lines for irrigation, computing field and farm areas and laying out farm buildings and roads.
1.5 Uses of survey The planning of all engineering and construction projects extending over
large areas, such as highways, railways, irrigation, water supply etc., are based upon
elaborate and complete surveys.
4
Lecture No. 3
Measuring of distances
Four main direct methods that are available for measuring distance. The direct methods
are: 1. Pacing 2. Instrumental Method 3. Judging Distance and Time Measurements 4. Chaining.
1. Pacing
The pacing technique is mostly employed in preliminary surveys and explorations. In this
method, the surveyor is required to conduct a rough survey quickly. This also roughly check the
distance measured by other means.
Fig,3.1. Pacing in Surveying
In this method, the number of paces between the two points of the line is counted. Knowing the
average length of the pace helps to know the length of the line. The length of the pace is
dependent on the person who is measuring, the ground, the speed of pacing and the slope of the
country.
By walking on an approximate level ground over various lines of known lengths helps to
determine the length of one‟s natural step. Performing pacing over rough ground or on slopes is a
difficult process.
2. Instrumental Method
2.1 Passometer
The passometer is a watch like instrument that is carried on the person‟s pocket or tied on the
man‟s leg. This instrument records the paces when the man moves from one point to another.
5
Fig.3.2 Passometer
This technique hence overcomes the monotony and strain in counting the paces by the
surveyor. The distance is calculated as the product of the number of paces and the average length
of the pace.
2.2. Pedometer
Pedometer is a similar device like passometer that automatically measures the distance. A
pedometer is best in measuring the vertical distances.
Fig.3.3 Pedometer
2.3 Odometer
Odometer is an instrument that measures the number of revolutions of a wheel. The
number of revolutions taken to cover the length multiplied by the circumference of the wheel
gives the value of the distance covered.
Fig.3.4 Odometer in Surveying
3. Judging Distance and Time Measurements:
For very approximate results such as in reconnaissance survey, the distances may be
determined by judgement only. The distances are also roughly determined by knowing the
average time taken per km by a person at walk or a horse at trot and the total time taken to cover
that distance.
6
4. Chaining:
The operation of measuring distance with the help of a chain or a tape is called chaining.
It is the most accurate of all the methods of measuring distance and is commonly used.
Ordinarily a chain is used for measuring the distance but where great accuracy is required, a steel
tape is invariably used
7
Lecture No. 4
Chain survey
4. Chaining:
It is the method of measuring distance with a chain or tape. Of the various methods of
determining distance, chaining is the most accurate and common method. For work of ordinary
precision, a chain is used. But, where great accuracy is required, a steel tape is invariably used.
4.1 Instruments used in Chain survey
Instruments used for measuring distances
1. Chain
2. Tape
Instruments used for marking survey stations
1. Ranging rod
2. Offset rod
3. Laths and whites
4. Pegs
Instruments used for setting right angles
1. Cross staff
2. Optical square
Other instruments:
1. Arrow
2. Plumb bob
4.1.1 Chain
The chain is composed of 100 or 150 pieces of links, made up of 4 mm diameter
galvanized mild steel wire. The ends of each link bent into a loop and connected together by
means of three oval rings which offered flexibility to the chain and make less liable to become
kinked. The joints of the links are usually open, but in the best chains they are welded so as to
render the chain less liable to stretching. The ends of the chain provided with brass handles for
dragging the chain on the ground, each with a swivel joint, so that the chain can be turned round
without twisting. The length of a link is the distance between the centers of the two consecutive
middle rings. The end links include the handles. Metallic tags or indicators of distinctive pattern
are fixed at various distinctive points of the chain to felicitate quick reading of fraction of a chain
in surveying measurements.
4.1.2 Metric chain
IS 1492-1956 covers requirement of chains in metric units. The chains are made in length
of 20 and 30 meters .To enable the reading of fractions of a chain without much difficulty, tallies
are fixed at every five-meter length and small brass rings are provided at every meter length,
except where tallies are attached. Connecting links between two large links are oval in shape, the
central one being a circular ring. The length of the chain is marked over the handle to indicate
the length and also to distinguish from non-metallic chains. The length of each link is 0.2 m
8
(20cm) in 20m chain is provided with 100 links and 30 m chain divided into 150 links (Fig. 4.1).
The advantages of the chain are :
(i) it is very suitable for rough usage
(ii) it can be easily repaired in the field
(iii) it can be easily read.
Fig.4.1 Metric chain
4.1.3 Types of chains
(1) Gunter’s Chain: It is also called surveyor‟s chain. The Gunter‟s chain is 66 ft. long and is
divided into 100 links. Therefore, each end link is equal to 0.66 ft. long. It is very convenient for
measuring distances in miles and furlongs and for measuring land when the unit of area is an
acre, on account of its simple relation to the mile and the acre.
i. 10 Guntur‟s chains – 1 furlong
ii. 80 Guntur‟s chains- 1 mile
iii. 10 square Guntur‟s chains – 1 acre
9
(2) Revenue Chain: The revenue chain is commonly used for measuring fields in cadastral
survey. It is 33 ft. long and divided into 16 links.
(3) Engineers’ Chain: The engineer‟s chain is 100 ft. long and is divided into 100 links each
link is equal to 1 ft. The construction details are same as that of a Gunter‟s chain. It is used on all
engineering surveys. The distances measured with the engineer‟s chain are recorded in feet and
decimals.
(4) Steel Band: The steel band, also called the band chain, consists of a ribbon of steel with a
brass swivel handle at each end. It is 20 or 30 m long and 16 mm wide. It is wound on open steel
cross, or on a metal reel in a closed case. The graduations are marked in two ways: (a) The band
is divided by brass studs at every 0.2 m and numbered at every l m, the first and the last link
being subdivided into cm and mm, (b) The graduations are etched as meters, decimeters,
centimeters on one side and 0.2 m links on the other. Brass tallies are fixed at every 5 m length
of the band. It is best adapted to general field work and rough usage. For accurate work, the steel
band is now preferred. It is lighter and easier to handle than the chain. It is practically unalterable
in length. It must be protected from rust by frequent cleaning and oiling.
4.1.4 Tapes: When greater accuracy is required in measurement and the ground to be surveyed
is not very rough, the tapes can be used. Tapes are available both in ft. and meters. For
surveying, mostly 30 m tape is used. Tapes made of various materials and are, therefore, divided
into five classes:
(1) Cloth or linen,
(2) Metallic,
(3) Steel,
(4) Invar and
(5) Synthetic material.
(1) Cloth or linen Tape: It is made of varnished strip of woven linen 12 to 16 mm wide with a
brass handle at zero ends, whose length is also included in the length of the tape. The tape is
attached to a spindle and is wound in a leather case. It is very light and handy, but not so
accurate. For very precise measurements, it is not used. The linen tape may be used for taking
subsidiary measurements such as offsets. It is easily affected by damp. When the tape gets wet, it
shrinks and care should be taken that it is not wound up until is cleaned and dried. It stretches
easily and is likely to twist and tangle. It is therefore little used in surveying.
(2) Metallic Tape: It is made from good quality cotton or linen and is reinforced with fine brass
or copper wires. This prevents stretching of fibers and is therefore, better than simple linen tapes.
They are also not suited for very precise measurements. It is made in lengths of 2, 5, 10, 20, 30
and 50 meters.
10
(3) Steel Tape: It is made of steel ribbon or stainless steel, or may be provided with vinyl
coating and is very accurate. It is used for very precise measurements and for checking the
accuracy of chain lengths. The denominations of the tape measures are 1, 2, 10, 30, and 50 m.
The outer end of the tape is provided with a ring or other device facilitating withdrawal. The ring
or the device is fastened to the tape by a metal strip of the same width as the tape. The length of
the tape includes the metal ring when provided (Fig.4.2).
Fig.4.2. Steel tape
(4) Invar Tape: For work of the highest precision, the invar tape is generally used as in
measurement of base lines in triangulation and in city work. It is made of an alloy of steel (64%)
and nickel (36%) and possesses a very low coefficient of thermal expansion (0.6 ×10-4 for 1°C).
It is 6 mm wide and may be obtained in lengths of 30 m, 50 m and 100 m.
(5) Synthetic Tape: The tapes are manufactured of glass fibre having a PVC coating. They are
graduated every 10 mm and figured every 100 mm whose metric figures are shown in red at
every metre. The tapes maintain their lengths well and are convenient for measuring short
lengths.
4.1.5 Ranging Rods: The ranging rods are used for ranging lines and to mark stations which are
at greater distance (Fig.4.3). They are made of well seasoned straight grained timber of teak, blue
pine, sisso or deodar. They are circular or octagonal in cross section of 3 cm nominal diameter
and pointed metal shoe of 15 cm long is provided at the lower end to facilitate fixing in the
ground. They are made of two sizes namely one of 2 m and the other of 3 m and are divided into
equal parts each 0.2 m long. In order to make them visible at a distance, they are painted
11
alternately black and white, or red and white or red, white, and black successively. When they
are at a considerable distance, red and white and yellow flags about 25 cm square be fastened at
the top to improve the visibility.
4.1.6 Arrows (Chain pins): Accompanying each chain are 10 arrows. They are also called
marking or chaining pins, and are used to mark the end of each chain during the process of
chaining. They are made of good quality metallic wires of 4 mm (8 s. w. g.) in diameter and of a
minimum tensile strength of 700N/ mm2. The wire is black enameled. The arrows are made 400
mm in length, are pointed at one end for inserting into the ground and bent into a ring at the other
end for facility of carrying. They should have a piece of white or red tape tied to the ring so that
they can be made easily visible at a distance. To mark the end of each chain length, the arrow is
inserted in the ground, but when the ground is hard, a scratch may be made with the pointed end
(Fig.4.4)
Fig.4.3 Ranging Rods
4.1.7 Plumb bob: A plumb bob consists of a metal weight made of brass with a pointed end
(Fig.4.5). It is suspended by a string and is used to locate points directly below or above another
point. It is also used for accurately centering of compass or level or theodolite over a station
mark, and for testing the verticality of ranging poles.
4.1.8 Pegs: Wooden pegs are used to mark the positions of stations. They are made of hard
timber and are tapered at one end (Fig.4.6). They are usually, 2.5 cm square and 15 cm long, but
in soft ground, pegs 40 to 60 cm long and 4 to 5 cm square suitable.
12
Fig.4.4 Arrows Fig.4.5 Plumb bob
4.1.9 Off-set rod: The off-set rod is similar to the ranging rod but is usually 3 m long and is
divided into parts each 0.2 m in length. It is chiefly used for aligning the off-set line and
measuring short off-sets.
Fig.4.6 Peg
13
Lecture No. 5
Cross-Staff and Optical Square working Mechanism
5.1 Cross-Staff
Cross-staff is used for (i) finding the foot of the perpendicular from a given point to a
line, and (ii) setting out a right angle at a given point on a line. There are two types of cross-staff,
namely, (1) the open and
(2) the French, the first one being in common use.
5.1.1 Open cross-staff:
The simplest form of cross staff is the open cross staff. It consists of two parts (1) the
head and (2) the leg. The head consists of four metal arms with vertical slits. The arms are rigidly
fixed in such a manner so that the center of one pair of arms forming a straight line makes right
angle with the other pair of arms. In one line, one of the slits is narrower than the other. One
horse hair is fixed at the center of the wider slit. The object is sighted from the narrow slit in line
with the hair. The cross staff is mounted on 25 mm diameter, about 1.5 metre long pole for fixing
on the ground (Fig.5.1).
For laying out a right angle at a point on the chain line, the cross staff is held vertically on
the supporting pole at the given point. Ranging rod is fixed on the chain line on either side of the
cross staff and sighted through the slit and horse hair. The cross staff is turned till the ranging rod
is visible. At this time, one sight through the other pair of slits and another person fixes a ranging
rod in this line of sight. Foot of the cross staff joined with the ranging rod gives perpendicular
line with the chain line.
Fig. 5.1 Open cross-staff
14
5.1.2 Optical Square: It is more accurate than the cross staff and it can be used for locating
objects situated at larger distances. It is small and compact hand instrument (Fig.5.2) and works
on the principle of reflection. Generally it is a round brass box about 5 cm in diameter and 1.25
cm deep. There is also a metal cover to protect it from dust, moisture etc. As shown in fig. 8, it
consists of horizontal mirror (H) and index mirror (1) placed at an angle of 450 to each other.
The mirror H is half silvered and the upper half is plain while the mirror I is fully silvered. There
are three openings a, b and c on the sides. Let AB is the chain line and it is required to locate an
object O during the process of surveying. The optical square is held in such a manner that a ray
of light from object O passes through slot c, strikes the mirror, gets reflected and strikes the
silvered portion of the mirror H. After being reflected from H, the ray passes through the pin
hole and becomes visible to the eye. The observer looking through the hole a can directly see the
ranging rod at B through the un-silvered portion of the mirror H and he image of the ranging rod
placed at O. Thus when both the ranging rods coincide, the line OD becomes perpendicular to
the chain line. If they do not coincide, the optical square has to move back and forth to get the
correct position of D.
Fig. 5.2 Optical square
15
Lecture No. 6
Errors in chaining/surveying obstruct
6.1 Errors in chaining
The errors that occur in chaining are classified as
i.) compensating and
ii.) cumulative. These errors may be due to variation in temperature, defects in
construction and personal defects in vision.
6.1.1 Compensating errors: are those which are liable to occur in either direction and hence
tend to compensate i.e. they are not likely to make the apparent result too large or too
small. Compensating errors are caused due to incorrect holding of the chain, fractional
part of the chain may not be correct and during stepping operation, crude method of
plumbing is adopted.
6.1.2 Cumulative errors: are those which occur in the same direction and tend to add up or
accumulate i. e., either to make the apparent measurement always too long or too short.
(i) Positive errors - These errors makes the measured length more than actual length.
(ii) Negative errors - making the measured length less than the actual.
6.2 Chaining a line
In all chaining operations two men, called chainmen, are required. The chainman at the
forward end of the chain is called the leader or head chainman, while the chainman at the rear
end the chain is known as the follower or rear chainman. The duties of the leader are ;
(i) to drag the chain forward,
(ii) to insert arrows at the end of every chain, and
(iii) to obey instructions of the follower,
While the duties of the follower are;
(i) to place the leader in line with the ranging rod or pole at the forward station,
(ii) to call out instructions to the leader,
(iii) always to carry the rear handle in his hand and not to allow it to drag on the
ground, and
(iv) to pick up the arrows inserted by the leader. The chainman who is more intelligent
and experienced be selected as the follower, as upon his care and judgment
depends the accuracy of measurements.
6.2.1 Unfolding the Chain
To lay out the chain on the ground, remove the leather strap, take both the handles in the
left hand and throw the chain well forward with the right hand. The leader, taking one handle of
the chain may then be examined to see if there are any kinks or bent links. This operation is also
called unfolding the chain.
16
6.2.2 Testing of a chain
It is always necessary to check the length of chain before commencing each day‟s work
and at frequent intervals; otherwise the measurement will become unreliable. Before testing the
chain, the surveyor should see that the links and rings are free from mud that there are no links or
bent links.
The chain is tested by comparing it with
(i) the chain standard (standard chain length)
(ii) with the steel tape which should be kept in the surveyor‟s office for this sole purpose.
If these are not available at hand, a test gauge may be established by driving two stout
pegs in the required distance apart (20 m or 30m) and inserting nails into their tops to mark exact
distance. It is advisable to have a permanent test gauge established in close proximity to the
surveyors office.
During the first use, the links become bent and, consequently the chain is shortened. It is
also shortened by mud clogging the links when working over muddy ground. On the other hand,
it gets elongated due to wear of many wearing surfaces, stretching of the links and joints, and
opening out of the small rings and rough handling in pulling it through hedges and fences.
6.3 Adjusting the chain
If the chain is found to be too long, it may be adjusted by
i) Closing up the joints of the connecting rings (that may be opened out)
ii) Hammering back to the shape of the elongated rings
iii) Replacing some of the worn out rings with new ones
iv) Removing one or more of the small rings.
If the chain is found to be too short, it may be adjusted by
i) Straightening any bent links
ii) Flattening some of the small connecting rings
iii) Replacing some of the worn out rings with new ones
iv) Replacing a few of the rings by those of the larger size
v) Inserting new rings as required
6.4 Ranging: During measurement of the length of a line, it is necessary that the chain should be
laid out on the ground in a straight line between the end stations. If the chain is long or end
station is not clearly visible, it is necessary to place intermediate ranging rods to maintain the
direction. The operation of establishing intermediate points on a straight line between the
terminal points is known as ranging. Ranging should be done prior to chaining. Ranging is
usually done by eye or by using instruments like line ranger and theodolite. Ranging is of two
kinds, namely, direct and indirect ranging.
17
6.4.1 Direct ranging: When the end points are visible from one another, intermediate ranging
rods are placed in line by direct observation, the process is known as direct ranging. Procedure
Let us assume that A and B are end points of a survey line visible from one another. Fix two
ranging rods vertically at stations A and B of survey line. The surveyor standing behind the
ranging rod at A and looks towards B, directs the assistant to move in the chain line and
establishes an intermediate station “P”. The point “P” should lie in the straight line joining AB.
The surveyor then directs the assistant to move his ranging rod to right or left until the three
ranging rods at A, P and B appear to be exactly in a straight line. Similarly, any number of
intermediate stations can be established between two end stations. Measure the distance between
A and B and record it in observation sheet.
6.4.2 Indirect ranging: When the end stations of a line are not intervisible due to high ground or
intervening hill and also when the ends of a line are not distinctly visible from one another due to
distance being too great, then indirect ranging can be adopted. Various obstructions, such as
ponds, hills, buildings, rivers are continuously come across in chaining process. It is however
essential that chaining should be continued in a straight line, special methods are therefore
employed in measuring distances across the obstructions. The various cases may be classified as:
i) Chaining is free, vision is obstructed, eg. raising ground (or) a hill intervening.
ii) Chaining obstructed but vision free, eg. pond, river, plantations, and tank.
iii) Both chain and vision are obstructed, eg. buildings.
i) Chaining is free vision is obstructed: In this case, the ends of a line are not inter visible.
There are two cases to be considered.
Case-1: Both ends may be visible from intermediate points on the line.
Case-2: Both ends may not be visible from any intermediate point.
Procedure for case-1: Let A and B are the two stations across a hill. Ranging rods are placed at
one of them is not visible from other. The following may be followed for ranging.
1) As shown in fig.4.9(a), select two intermediate points C and D such that ranging rods at B
and D are visible from C and ranging rods at A and C are visible from D. Also A, C, D, B
should be nearly as possible in a straight line.
2) The person at C looks towards B and directs the man at D to fix his ranging rod in a manner
such that C, D, B are in one straight line.
3) Now the person at D looks towards the ranging rod at A and directs the man at C to fix his
ranging rod at a place such that A, C and D are in one straight line.
4) Steps 2 and 3 above are repeated till the person at C finds C, D,. B to form a straight line and
simultaneously, the person at D finds A, C, D also to form a straight line, then all the four
points A, C, D, and B are lie in straight line.
18
Fig. 4.9 (a). Indirect method of ranging
Procedure for case 2: This case occurs, when it desired to run a line across a wooded field, the
trees and under-bush preventing the fixing of intermediate stations. In such a case, the method of
random line is the most suitable.
Fig.4.9 (b). Random method of ranging
As shown in fig. 4.9 (b), let AB be the line whose length is required. From A, run a line
(AB ), called a random line in any convenient direction, but as nearly towards B as can be
1
judged and continue until the point B is visible from B . Chain the line to B , where BB is
1 1 1
perpendicular to AB and measure BB , then
1 1
AB =
ii) Chaining obstructed, but vision free: This problem is to find out the distance between two
convenient points on the chain line on either side of the obstruction. There are two cases:
Case-1: In which, it is possible to chain round the obstruction.
Ex: A thorny hedge, a pond, a bend in the river.
Case-2: In which, it is not possible to chain round the obstruction.
Ex: River
Procedure for Case-1: Select two convenient points A and B on the chain line PR and on either side of
the obstruction (Fig.4.10). Then, erect equal perpendiculars AC and BD and measure the length CD. Then
AB=CD.
19
Fig. 4.10 Chaining obstructed but vision free (Case-1)
Procedure for Case-2: Select two points A and B on the chain line PR on opposite banks of river
(Fig.4.11). Set out a perpendicular AD and bisect it at C. At D, erect a perpendicular DE and mark the
point E in line with C and B. Measure DE, since the triangles ABC and CED are similar, then AB=DE.
Fig. 4.11 Chaining obstructed but vision free (Case-2)
iii) Both chaining and vision both obstructed: In this case the problem consists in
prolonging the line beyond the obstruction and determining the distance across it. A building is a
typical example of this class of obstruction.
Procedure: Choose two points A and B on the chain line PR (Fig.4.12). At A and B, erect
perpendiculars AE and BF of equal lengths. Check the diagonals BE and AF, which should be
equal and also EF, should be equal to AB. Prolong the line EF past the obstruction and select two
points G and H on it. At G and H, set out perpendiculars GC and HD are equal in length to AE.
The points C and D are obviously on the chain line PR and BC=FG. Great care must be taken in
setting out perpendiculars and to see that their lengths are exactly equal.
20
Fig. 4.12 Both chaining and vision are obstructed
4.7 Errors in measurement due to incorrect length of chain
The length of a chain may be correct at the beginning, but it may change with time as
more and more used. Due to continuous use of the chain over rough ground, the oval shaped
rings get elongated and thus the length of the chain increases. On the other hand some of the
links may get bent for there may be kinks. As a result the chain length reduces. In a very old
chain, some ring or links may be missing. Therefore, before the start of the work the correctness
of the chain length should be tested with a steel or invar tape. If the chain is too long, measured
distance will be less and if the chain is short, the measured distance will be more than the actual
distance. However, the measured distance can be corrected by using the formula:
Correct distance = [ ] × measured distance
Where = incorrect length of a chain,
L= normal correct length of a chain which may be 20m, 30m,etc.
Therefore, correct distance ×correct length of chain= Incorrect distance × incorrect length
of chain. If „e‟ is elongation or shortening of chain length, = (L+ e) , plus sign is used when
the chain is too long and minus sign is used when the chain is too short.
Example 1: The length of a line was found to be 600m when measured with 20 m chain. If the
chain is 15 cm short, find the correct length of line.
Solution:
True length of the chain, L = 20 m
21
The chain is 15 cm short.
Measured distance = 600 m
Incorrect length of chain, = 20 – = 19.85 cm
(minus sign is used because the chain is short)
⸫ Correct distance = [ ] × measured distance
= x 600 = 595.5m
Example 2: The area of a field was found to be 4000 m2 when measured with 30m chain. If the
length of the chain was 0.11m too short, find the correct area.
Solution: True length of the chain,
L = 30 m the chain is 0.11 m short.
Measured area = 4000 m2
Incorrect length of chain,
= 30 – 0.11 = 29.89 m
(minus sign is used because the chain is too short)
[ ]2
Correct area = × measured area
[ ]2x
= 4000 = 3970.72 m2
22
Lecture No. 7
Main lines, offsets in surveying
7.1 Base Line: The longest chain line in chain surveying is called the base line. This is the most
important line and the whole framework of triangles is based on this line and therefore, the
baseline should be very accurately measured (Fig.7.1). It should be passing through the centre of
the area.
Fig. 7.1 Base, check and tie lines in triangulation survey
7.1.1 Subsidiary or tie lines: When numbers of features are to be located and they are far away
from the main chain lines, then subsidiary or tie lines are used to locate such details. In fig.13.,
tie line FG is used to locate number of features. Tie line is obtained by joining two fixed points
on the main survey line. Tie lines can also be used as check lines to check the accuracy of
measurements and plotting.
7.1.2 Check lines: Check lines are also called as proof lines. The mistakes of the measurement
and plotting can be easily checked with the help of check lines. The check line is a line joining
the apex of a triangle to some fixed points on the opposite side, a line joining some fixed points
on any two sides of a triangle. Every triangle should be provided with a check line.
7.2 A chain survey may be executed in the following steps:
7.2.1 Reconnaissance: The preliminary instruction of the area to be surveyed is called
reconnaissance. It is essential that the surveyor should have a thorough knowledge of the ground
to be surveyed and its principle features. On arriving at the ground, the surveyor should
23
therefore, walk over the whole area and thoroughly examine the ground, so as to decide upon the
best possible arriving of the work. The surveyor should note the various boundaries, the positions
of buildings, roads, streams etc., various difficulties that may intervene the proposed chain lines
and the suitable positions of the stations. During the reconnaissance, the surveyor should prepare
a neat hand sketch called an index sketch or key plan fairly resembling the plan of the ground,
showing the boundaries, the principles features such as buildings, roads, tanks, etc., the positions
of the stations and chain lines. The sketch is drawn in the field.
7.3 Marketing stations: Having completed the reconnaissance and the index sketch, survey
stations should be marked on the ground by fixing vertically a ranging rod or a pole at each
station if the survey is only of a temporary character.
7.4 Reference sketches: After the stations are marked, they should be referred i.e., located the
measurements called ties, taken from three permanent points which are definite and easily
recognized i.e., corners of buildings, gate pillars, boundary stones, fence posts. Reference
sketches in case the station marks are displaced or lost or required at a future data.
7.5 Running survey lines: Having finished the preliminary work, chaining may be commenced
from the base line and carried through all the lines of the frame work as continuously as possible
24
Lecture No. 8
Field notes
4.13 Booking field notes
A field book is used for noting the readings when the survey is carried out. The field
book is about 22.5 cm long and 12.5 cm (Fig.8.2) wide and opens length wise. Generally single
or double red lines are drawn in the middle. Chainage lengths are noted in between the two red
lines and the space on either side is used for writing the offset lengths and for drawing rough
sketches of figures. The booking is commenced from the bottom of the page and work upward.
The initial and final chainage should be marked with a symbol ∆ and capital letters like A, B, C
etc., should be used to mark the stations. While noting the readings, the surveyor should face the
direction of chaining and offsets should be entered on the left or right side as they are situated.
The conventional symbols (Fig.8.1) should be used for recording different features. Each new
chain line should be started from a new page. One sample page of a field book is shown in
fig.15. At the commencement of the line in the book is written: the name (or) numbers of the
survey line, the name (or) number of station, the symbol perpendicular donating the station, tie
(or) subsidiary station should be indicated by a circle (or) a oval round their chainage figures, all
around the chain line are entered in the central column and offset retain opposite them on the
right (or) left of the column according as they are right (or) left of the survey line.
25
Fig. 8.1 Common symbols
26
Fig.8.2. Field book entry
27
Lecture No. 9
Triangulation survey area Identification
9.0 Measurement of areas
One of the main purpose of surveying is to measure the area of an agricultural farm, area
of plots to be used for construction purposes, command area of tube wells, canals etc. Two
general methods for measuring areas are: i) Triangulation, and ii) Traversing. In traversing, the
length of connected lines as well as their directions are measured by chain and compass
respectively.
9.1 Triangulation survey
Triangulation is the basis of trigonometrical or geometric surveys. As such triangulation
refers to a system of surveying in which one line is measured with a chain and all the three
angles are measured correctly by compass or theodolite. In case, only the sides of the triangles
are directly measured in the field and no angular measurement is taken, it is called triangulation
(or) chain surveying. The whole area is suitably divided into number of triangles and computes
the area of individual triangles and added to get total area. In dividing the total area into
triangles, care should be taken to see that the triangles are almost equilateral as far as possible to
minimum the errors. Although, the chain triangulation is very simple, but it is suitable only for
small plane areas without much obstruction.
9.2 Survey stations
A survey station is a point of reference at the beginning and end of a chain line. Stations are of
two types, they are:
i) Main stations
ii) Subsidiary on tie stations.
Main stations are the ends of the lines which connect the boundaries of the survey, and the lines
joining the main stations are called the main survey or chain lines. Subsidiary or tie stations are
the points selected on main survey lines to run auxiliary lines to locate the interior details such as
fences, hedges, buildings etc. when they are distant from the main lines. The symbol “O” is used
to denote stations. Capital and small letters are used to represent main and tie stations
respectively.
9.3 Selection of stations
While arranging the frame work of survey by selecting different stations, the following
points should be kept in mind:
1) All the main stations should be inter-visible.
2) The first principle in surveying is the working from whole to part and not from part to
whole. This should be strictly followed.
28
3) Generally, a long line (base line) should be run approximately through the centre and the
whole length of the area.
4) All triangles should be well conditioned to make their sides almost equal.
5) Long offsets should be avoided.
6) As far as possible, the no. of survey lines should be minimized.
9.4 Plotting procedure of chain survey
After the survey is completed, the recorded information is taken to the office and they
are plotted on a drawing sheet using a suitable scale. While plotting a chain survey, the following
steps are to be followed:
(i) Depending upon the area covered in the survey and its importance, a suitable scale is
chosen. Boundary lines are drawn leaving a suitable margin all around.
(ii) The base line which is the mainline in the survey should be suitably located in the map to
accommodate the whole plotting easily in the drawing sheet. The base line should be
most accurately plotted.
(iii)The intermediate stations are marked on the base line and the frame work of triangles is
completed.
(iv) Chainage lengths are measured along the chain lines for various offsets and points are
marked. From these points perpendiculars of suitable lengths are drawn to locate the
offsets.
(v) The accuracy of plotted frame work may be checked by means of check and tie lines.
(vi) The field book should be kept side by side in the same direction as the survey proceeded
in the field parallel to the chain line to be plotted.
(vii) For drawing different objects, conventional symbols should be used.
(viii) The title of the survey, name of the surveyor, date etc., should be written at the right
hand bottom corner. The scale is drawn below the map.
9.5 Drawing instruments required
The following drawing instruments are generally used in drawing office works.
1. Drawing table (size 2.4 × 1.2m)
2. A drawing board of good quality (900 × 850m)
3. The square with ebony edge (lengths vary from 500 × 150m)
4. Set squares – required for drawing parallel and perpendicular lines.
5. An instrument box
6. Protractor
7. Four set of French curves – required for drawing irregular and curved figures.
8. A standard straight edge of 2m long for drawing long lines.
29
Areas of irregularly bounded fields - different methods.
9.6 Measurement of areas of irregularly bounded fields
Various formulae such as Mid-ordinate rule or Average ordinate rule, Trapezoidal rule
and Simpson‟s rule are applied for computation of areas of irregular bounded fields. All these
methods are suitable for long narrow strips such as grounds occupied by a railway or road. A
base line is drawn through the area and the area is divided into a number of equal parts.
Simpson‟s rule assumes that the different parts are portions of parabolic areas, where as the other
rules assume that the boundaries between the extremities are straight.
9.6.1 The Mid-ordinate Rule: In this method, the ordinates are measured at the mid-points of
each division (Fig.16) and the area is calculated by the formula,
Area ( ∆)
=
Where
h1, h2, h3 etc., are the ordinates at the mid-points of each division
l = the length of the base line
n = the number of equal parts into which the base line is divided
d = the common distance between the ordinates =
Fig.9.1. Mid ordinate rule
9.6.2 The Average Ordinate Rule: In this method, the ordinates are drawn and scaled at each of
the points of division of the base line (Fig.17). The average of these ordinates multiplied by the
length of the base line gives the required area.
30
Fig.9.2. Average ordinate rule
Area ( ∆) = O + O + O + ………………+O
1 2 3 n X
n+1
O , O , O etc., are the ordinates at each of the points of division
1 2 3
= the length of the base line
n = the number of equal parts into which the base line is divided
9.6.3 The Trapezoidal Rule: This rule is more accurate than the first two ones. In this method,
the area is divided into a series of trapezoids (Fig.18). The rule may be stated as follows:
“To the sum of the first and the last ordinates, add twice, the sum of the intermediate ordinates.
Multiply the total sum thus obtained by the common distance between the ordinates. One half of
this product gives the required area.”
i.e., Area (∆) = O +2O + 2O + 2O + ………+ 2O +O
0 1 2 3 n-1 n X
2
= Ø +2O + 2O + 2O + ………+ 2O +O
0 1 2 3 n-1 n
= d O + O +O + O + O + ………+ O
0 n 1 2 3 n-1
2
31
Fig. 9.3. Trapezoidal rule
Note: When the base line cuts the boundary at one or both ends of the figure, O0 or On or both
are zero. However, they must not be omitted from the formula.
9.6.4 Simpson’s Rule: It may be stated as follows:
“To the sum of the first and the last ordinates, add twice the sum of the remaining odd ordinates
and four times the sum of all the even ordinates. Multiply the total sum thus obtained by one-
third of the common distance between the ordinates, and the result gives the required area
(Fig.19).”
Area (∆) = O +4O + 4O + 4O + ………+ 2O +4O +O
0 1 2 3 n-2 n-1 n
Fig. 9.4 Simpson‟s rule
Note: O , O , O , etc., ( the 2nd, 4th , 6th, etc., from the end) are even ordinates, and O , O , O ,
1 3 5 2 4 6
etc., ( the 3rd , 5th , 7th, etc., from the end) are odd ordinates.
9.6.5 Comparison of Rules: The results obtained using Simpson‟s rule are greater or less than
those obtained by using the Trapezoidal rule according as the curve of the boundary is concave
or convex towards the base line. The results obtained by using the Simpson‟s rule are more
accurate and, therefore, where great accuracy is required, it should be invariably used.
For the application of the Trapezoidal rule and Simpson‟s rules, the interval between
successive ordinates must be uniform throughout the length of the base line. If it is not the same,
the base line may be divided into different sections, each having the same interval.
32
Lecture No. 10
Offset Survey
10 .1. Offsetting
This technique may be employed as an independent method, but is more commonlyused
in association with compass traverse work. It is particularly useful for filling in the fine detail
missed by the compass traverse and accurately plotting the shape of linear features eg a river
bank or morphological boundary.
The technique requires that a straight base is established in the field (eg. one 'leg' of a
compass traverse). Often a surveyors chain is used rather than a tape as it is less likely to flex,
and the technique is often referred to as 'chain and offset'. The distance from this base line to the
point of interest is then measured (the offset).
Offsets may be taken objectively or subjectively. In the former case offsets are taken at
fixed and regular intervals. In the latter, they are taken at points that the surveyor deems
significant. In most cases a combination of the two works best.
10.1.1Method
1. Lay out a straight base line (as for a single leg of a compass traverse) as close to the features to
be recorded as possible - the shorter the offset, the less room for error. Record the length and
bearing of this base line.
2. At each determined point measure the distance to the point of interest at 90o to the base line.
3. Record the ground length along the base line to the offset.
10.1.2.Plotting
1. Reconstruct the base line of the survey, at the selected scale and in relation to North, as for a
compass traverse.
2. Plot offset data as recorded, identifying each offset point as a dot.
3. If you were mapping a linear feature - join the dots !
The above methods allow us to plot the spatial location of points of interest relative to one
another. What they do not allow us to do is record any information about the shape of the land
we are working on and the nature of any slopes at the site, normally essential information. The
following method allows us to construct a cross-section of the slope, or slope profile.
10.2. Chainage
It is the distance of a well defined point from the starting point. In chain surveying it is normally
referred to as the distance of the foot of the offset from the starting point on the chain line
33
10.3. Offset
The lateral measurement taken from an object to the chain line is known as „offset‟. Offsets are
taken to locate objects with reference to the chain line. They may be of two kinds -
perpendicular and oblique.
10.3.1. Perpendicular offsets When the lateral measurements are taken perpendicular to the
chain line, they are known as perpendicular offsets
Perpendicular offsets may be taken in the following ways:
(a) By setting a perpendicular by swinging a tape from the object to the chain line. The point of
minimum reading on the tape will be the base of the perpendicular
(b) By setting a right angle in the ratio 3 : 4 : 5
(c) By setting a right angle with the help of builder‟s square or tri-square
(d) By setting a right angle by cross-staff or optical square.
10.3.2. Oblique offsets Any offset not perpendicular to the chain line is said to be oblique.
Oblique offsets are taken when the objects are at a long distance from the chain line or when it is
not possible to set up a right angle due to some difficulties. Such offsets are taken in the
following manner.
Suppose AB is a chain line and p is the corner of a building. Two points „a‟ and „b‟ are
taken on the chain line. The chainages of „a‟ and „b‟ are noted. The distances „ap‟ and „bp‟ are
measured and noted in the field book. Then „ap‟ and „bp‟ are the oblique offsets. When the
triangle abp is plotted, the apex point p will represent the position of the corner of the the
building.
Perpendicular offsets are preferred for the following reasons:
(a) They can be taken very quickly
(b) The progress of survey is not hampered
(c) The entry in the field book becomes easy
(d) The plotting of the offsets also becomes easy
3. Number of offsets The offsets should be taken according to the nature of the object. So, there
is no hard and fast rule regarding the number of offsets. It should be remembered that the
objects are to be correctly represented and hence the number of offsets should be decided on the
field. Some guidelines are given below:
(a) When the boundary of the object is approximately parallel to the chain line, perpendicular
offsets are taken at regular intervals
(b) When the boundary is straight, perpendicular offsets are taken at both ends of it
(c) When the boundary line is zigzag, perpendicular offsets are taken at every point of bend to
represent the shape of the boundary accurately. In such a case, the interval of the offsets may be
irregular
34
(d) When a road crosses the chain line perpendicularly, the chainage of the intersection point is
to be noted
(e) When a road crosses a chain line obliquely, the chainages of intersection points „a‟ and „b‟
are noted. Then at least one offset is taken on both sides of the inter-section points. More offsets
may be taken depending on the nature of the road. Here, perpendicular offsets are taken at „c‟
and „d‟
(f) When the building is small, its corners are fixed by perpendicular or oblique offsets and the
other dimensions are taken directly on the field and noted in the field book.
(g) When the building is large, zigzag in shape and oblique to the chain line, then the corners are
fixed by perpendicular or oblique offsets. Then the full plan of the building is drawn on a
separate page along with all the dimensions. This page should be attached with the field book at
the proper place.
(h) When the object is circular, perpendicular offsets are taken at short and regular intervals
4. Limiting length of offset The maximum length of the offset should not be more than the
length of the tape used in the survey. Generally, the maximum length of offset is limited to 15m.
However, this length also depends upon the following factors:
(a) The desired accuracy of the map
(b) The scale of the map
(c) The maximum allowable deflection of the offset from its true direction and
(d) The nature of the ground
Various instruments are used in chain survey.
They are (1) Chain (2) Arrows (3) Pegs (4) Ranging rods (5) Offset rods (6) Plasterer's laths and
whites (7) Plumb bob
The following are the precise instruments used for setting out right angles :-
1. Cross staff
2. French cross staff
3. Adjustable cross staff
4. Optical square
5. Prism square
35
Lecture No. 11
Offset Survey Area Identification
36
Lecture No. 12
Compass survey- Prismatic Compass
In troduction
According to the method employed, surveying is classified into Triangulation surveying
and Traverse surveying. A series of connected survey lines of known lengths and directions is
called a traverse. When triangulation is not possible, traversing method is used. In traversing,
when compass is used for making angular measurements, it is known as compass traversing or
compass surveying.
Principle of Compass Surveying
In compass traversing the directions of survey lines are fixed by angular measurements
and not by forming a network of triangles. A compass survey is one in which the traverse work
consists of series of lines the lengths and directions of which are measured with a chain or a tape,
and with an angular instrument respectively.
A traverse may be classified as:
a) Closed traverse
b) Open traverse
A) Closed traverse: A closed traverse is a traverse in which the sides of a traverse form a closed
polygon.
B) Open traverse: An open traverse is a traverse in which the sides of traverse do not form a
closed polygon.
Description of Prismatic Compass
The prismatic compass consists of a circular box about 85 to 110 mm diameter. At the
center of metal box a needle and pivot is provided. The pivot balances the magnetic needle
which is attached to graduated aluminum ring. The graduations are in degrees to 30 minuets and
from 00 to 3600 in the clock wise direction. The 00 is marked at south end of magnetic needle
because the readings are read at the opposite end of the object. At west it is marked 900 , north
1800 and east 2700 respectively. The graduations are marked inverted because they are viewed
through a prism which is cut to 450 on one face and 900 for other two faces (Fig 5.1). The
readings get reflected through prism resulting in erected image. A sighting slit is provided in the
box carrying the prism. This box can be moved up and down for focusing by means of stud. The
prism box is hinged so that it can be folded to the rim of the compass box. Two sun glasses are
provided to observe bright objects. An object vane is provided in line of sighting slit. It is an
open frame with a central vertical horse hair for sighting the object. The object vane is hinged to
compass. When it is not in use, it is folded flat on the glass cover. The base of object vane
presses the lifting pin bringing the magnetic needle to rest with the help of lifting lever. A brake
pin is provided to stop the oscillations of the graduated ring to facilitate the reading of the
graduated ring. A glass cover is fitted over the box to protect the needle from dust. The compass
37
is fitted to a tripod stand. A tripod stand consists of a ball and socket joint which helps in
leveling the compass quickly.
Fig 5.1 Prismatic Compass
Method of using Prismatic Compass:
The compass may be held in the hand, but for better results, it is usually mounted on a
tripod which carries a vertical spindle in a ball and socket joint to which the box is screwed. By
means of this arrangement the instrument can be quickly leveled and also rotated in a horizontal
plane and clamped in any position.
Working of Prismatic Compass
This can be used while holding it in hand, but for better accuracy, it is usually mounted
on a light tripod which carries a vertical spindle in the ball and socket arrangement to which
compass is screwed. By means of this arrangement the compass can be placed in position easily.
Its working involves the following steps. (i) Centering (ii) Levelling, and (iii) observing the
bearing
(i) Centering The compass should be centered over the station where the bearing is to be taken
by dropping a small piece of stone so that it falls on the top of the peg marking the station.
(ii) Levelling The compass should then be leveled by eye, by means of a ball and socket joint so
that the ring may swing quite freely. It should be clamped when leveled.
(iii) Observing the bearing. To observe the bearing of a line AB
1) Centre the compass over the station A and level it.
2) Having turned up vertical prism and the sighting vane, raise or lower the prism until the
graduations are clearly visible.
3) Turn the compass box until the ranging rod at the station B is bisected by the hair when
looked through the slit above the prism.
38
4) When the needle comes to rest, look through the prism and note the reading at which the hair
line produced appears to cut the image of the graduated ring which gives the required bearing of
the line AB. Readings are usually estimated to the nearest 15‟.
39
Lecture No. 13
Concept of Meridian, True Median, -Bearing, Reduced Bearing-Fore and Back Bearing
C oncept of Meridian, True Median, Magnetic Meridian and Arbitary Meridian
Meridian: Meridian is a standard direction from which, the bearings of survey lines are
measured. There are three types of meridians (Fig.5.2).
1) True meridian
2) Magnetic meridian
3) Arbitrary meridian.
True meridian: It is a line of intersection of earth‟s surface formed by a plane passing through
north and south poles and the given place.
Magnetic meridian: It is the direction indicted by a freely suspended magnetic needle.
Arbitrary meridian: It is any convenient direction assumed as meridian for measuring bearings
of survey lines.
Bearing It is a horizontal angle made by the survey line with reference to the meridian, based on
the meridian
Fig.5.2 Meridians
Representation of Bearing
Bearings are expressed in the following two systems.
1) Whole circle bearings system.
2) Quadrantal bearings system.
1) Whole Circle Bearing
In this system, the bearing of a line is always measured clock wise from the direction of
the north of the meridian towards the line around the circle. Whole circle bearings of lines have
been shown in fig 5.3
2) Quadrantal Bearings
In this system the bearings of a line is measured from either the north or the south, clock
wise or counter clockwise whichever is nearer to the line towards the east or west. The angle at
40
any station in a plane is divided into four quadrants by two lines at right angles to each other.
These are the north south and east west lines. The bearing is reckoned from 00 to 900 in each
quadrant. Quadrantal bearings of lines have been shown in fig 3.4 Quadrantel bearings are also
called as reduced bearings.
Fig 5.3 Whole Circle bearings and Quadrantal Bearings
Conversion of Whole Circle bearings into Quadrantal Bearings
The whole circle bearing of a line can be converted to quadrantal bearing by reducing it
to an angle less than 900 which has the same numerical value of the trigonometric functions.
Rule of conversion of whole circle bearings into quadrantial bearing.
Case W.C.B. between Rule for R.B. Quadrant
I 00 and 900 Same as W.C.B. N.E.
II 900 and 1800 1800 - W.C.B. S.E.
III 1800 and 2700 W.C.B. -1800 S.W.
IV 2700 and 3600 3600 - W.C.B. S.W.
Fore Bearing to Back Bearing
 Fore Bearing (F.B)- Bearing measured in the direction of progress of survey
 Back Bearing(B.B)- Bearing measured opposite to the direction of survey
BB = FB ± 180°
 Use positive sign of FB < 180°
BB = FB + 180° (FB < 180°)
 Use negative sign of FB > 180°
BB = FB - 180° (FB > 180°)
41
Lecture 14
Compass Surveying-Problems
42
Lecture 15
Soil and water conservation
Definition
Soil erosion is the process of detachment of soil particles from the top soil and transportation of
the detached soil particles by wind and / or water. The agents causing erosion are wind and
water. The detaching agents are falling raindrop, channel flow and wind. The transporting agents
are flowing water, rain splash and wind.
Types of erosion:
There are two major types of soil erosion
a) Geological erosion (Natural or normal erosion): is said to be in equilibrium with soil
forming process. It takes place under natural vegetative cover completely undisturbed by biotic
factors. This is very slow process.
b) Accelerated erosion: is due to disturbance in natural equilibrium by the activities of man and
animals through land mismanagement, destructing of forests over grazing etc., Soil loss through
erosion is more than the soil formed due to soil forming process.
Based on the agents causing erosion, erosion is divided into
a. Water erosion
b. Wind erosion
a. Water erosion: Major erosive agents in water erosion are impacting/ falling raindrops
and runoff water flowing over soil surface.
Process of water erosion
Detachment of soil particles is by either raindrop impact or flowing water. Individual
raindrops strike the soil surface at velocities up to 9 m/s creating very intensive hydrodynamic
force at the point of impact leading to soil particle detachment. Over land flow detaches soil
particles when their erosive hydrodynamic force exceeds the resistance of soil to erosion.
Detached soil particles are transported by raindrop splash and runoff. The amount of soil
transported by runoff is more than due to raindrop splash. Thus the falling raindrops break the
soil aggregates and detach soil particles from each other. The finer particles (silt and clay) block
the soil pores and increase the rate of runoff and hence loss of water and soil.
Forms of water erosion
Water erosion occurs in stages identified as sheet erosion, rills, gullies, ravines, landslides and
stream bank erosion.
a) Sheet erosion: It is the uniform removal of surface soil in thin layers by rainfall and runoff
water. The breaking action of raindrop combined with surface flow is the major cause of sheet
erosion. It is the first stage of erosion and is least conspicuous, but the most extensive.
43
b) Rill erosion: When runoff starts, channelisation begins and erosion is no longer uniform.
Raindrop impact does not directly detach any particles below flow line in rills but increases the
detachment and transportation capacity of the flow. Rill erosion starts when the runoff exceeds
0.3 to 0.7 mm/s. Incisions are formed on the ground due to runoff and erosion is more apparent
than sheet erosion. This is the second stage of erosion. Rills are small channels, which can be
removed by timely normal tillage operations.
c) Gully erosion: It is the advanced stage of water erosion. Size of the unchecked rills increase
due to runoff. Gullies are formed when channelised runoff form vast sloping land is sufficient in
volume and velocity to cut deep and wide channels. Gullies are the spectacular symptoms of
erosion. If unchecked in time no scope for arable crop production.
d) Ravines: They are the manifestations of a prolonged process of gully erosion. They are
typically found in deep alluvial soils. They are deep and wide gullies indicating advanced stage
of gully erosion.
e) Landslides: Landslides occur in mountain slopes, when the slope exceeds 20% and width is
6m. Generally land slides cause blockage of traffic in ghat roads.
f) Stream bank erosion: Small streams, rivulets, torrents (hill streams) are subjected to stream
bank erosion due to obstruction of their flow. Vegetation sprouts when streams dry up and
obstructs the flow causing cutting of bank or changing of flow course.
Losses due to erosion:
i) Loss of fertile top soil
ii) Loss of rain water
iii) Loss of nutrients
iv) Silting up of reservoirs
v) Damage to forests
vi) Reduction in soil depth
vii) Floods
viii) Adverse effect on public health
ix) Loss of fertile land
x) Economic losses
b. Wind erosion
Erosion of soil by the action of wind is known as wind erosion. It is a serious problem on lands
devoid of vegetation. It is more common in arid and semi arid regions. It is essentially a dry
weather phenomenon stimulated by the soil moisture deficiency. The process of wind erosion
consists of three phases: initiation of movement, transportation and deposition. About 33 m.ha
in India is affected by wind erosion. This includes 23.49 m.ha of desert and about 6.5 m.ha of
coastal sands. The Thar Desert is formed mainly by blow in sand.
44
Mechanism of wind erosion
Lifting and abrasive action of wind results in detachment of tiny soil particles from the granules
or clods. The impact of these rapidly moving particles dislodge other particles from clods and
aggregates. These dislodged particles are ready for movement. Movement of soil particles in
wind erosion is initiated when the pressure by the wind against the surface soil grains overcomes
the force of gravity on the grains. Minimum wind velocity necessary for initiating the movement
of most erodable soil particles (about 0.1 mm diameter) is about 16 km /hr at a height of 30.5 cm.
Most practical limit under field conditions, where a mixture of sizes of single grained material
present is about 21 km/hr at a height of 30.5 cm.
In general movement of soil particles by wind takes place in three stages: saltation,
surface creep and suspension.
a. Saltation: It is the first stage of movement of soil particles in a short series of bounces or
jumps along the ground surface. After being rolled by the wind, soil particles suddenly leap
almost vertically to form the initial stage of movement in saltation. The size of soil particles
moved by saltation is between 0.1 to 0.5 mm in diameter. This process may account for 50 to
70% of the total movement by wind erosion.
b. Surface creep: Rolling and sliding of soil particles along the ground surface due to impact of
particles descending and hitting during saltation is called surface creep. Movement of particles
by surface creep causes an abrasive action of soil surface leading to break down of non-erodable
soil aggregates. Coarse particles longer than 0.5 to 2.0 mm diameter are moved by surface creep.
This process may account for 5 to 25% of the total movement.
c. Suspension: Movement of fine dust particles smaller than 0.1 mm diameter by floating in the
air is known as suspension. Soil particles carried in suspension are deposited when the
sedimentation force is greater than the force holding the particles in suspension. This occurs with
decrease in wind velocity. Suspension usually may not account for more than 15% of total
movement.
45
Lecture No. 16
Crop-Water Management
16.1 Base Period:
it is the time period between the first watering of the crop during its sowing to last watering
before its harvesting. It is generally expressed in 'days'.
16.2 Delta:
It is the total depth of water required by a crop during entire base period.
Some quantity of water is required for any crop to come to its maturity. The total quantity of
water required for any crop during its base period (B) for its full fledged nourishment when expressed in
depth of water(i.e. in 'cm' or in 'inches') is called its Delta. The total quantity of water(i.e. volume of
water) is divided by the total irrigated area to obtain Delta of crop of the irrigated area.
“Δ‟= volume of water/ total irrigated area
16.3 Crop period:
Crop period is the time period between sowing of a crop to its harvesting.
The another related term is Crop period. For practical purpose Base period and Crop period are taken as
same but they have a little difference. In this manner, Crop period is slightly greater than the Base period.
16.4 Duty:
Duty of a water simply expresses the number of hectare of land that can be irrigated for the full growth of
the given crop by supplying 1 cumec water continuously during the entire base period of that crop. It is
generally represented by 'D'.
Its unit is hectare/cumec.
For example, if water flowing at the rate of 1 cumec, runs continuously for B days of the crop matures
100 hectares then Duty of that crop is 100 hectare/cumec to the base of B days.
Duty varies from point to point. It increases as one moves to downstream from the head of main canal to
the head of branches. It is due to the transmission losses in the channels.
16.5 Relation between Delta and Duty:
Let a crop of Base period B for which 1 cumec water is supplied continuously for its full growth.
Then the total volume of water supplied during B days for that Crop = (1X B X 24 X 60 X60)
cubic meter.
46
By the definition of duty, it is clear that it matures D hectares of land.
Then the total depth of water supplied during base period B = (1*B*24*60*60)/(D*10000)
=8.64(B/D) meters
OR
We know total depth of water supplied during base period of a crop is Delta.
Then, Delta= 8.64B/D meters.
Factors on which duty depends
 Type of crop
 Climate and season
 Useful rainfall
 Type of soil
 Efficiency of cultivation method
Importance of Duty
It helps us in designing an efficient canal irrigation system. Knowing the total available
water at the head of a main canal, and the overall duty for all the crops required to be irrigated in
different seasons of the year, the area which can be irrigated can be worked out. Inversely, if we
know the crops area required to be irrigated and their duties, we can work out the discharge
required for designing the channel.
Measurement of irrigation water – importance. Methods of measuring water
16. 6 Water measuring devices
Day to day water is becoming a costly input in agriculture and other enterprises. The
knowledge of soil, water and plant is highly essential to apply water to the crops precisely as per
required quantity. The planning of cropping system of irrigation project and design of irrigation
method is depends upon the available discharge. Most of the drainage projects and public health
engineering water supply system require discharge measurement. The measurement of discharge
is also essential, if the government agencies desire to charge the water rates to the farmers on
volume basis.
16.6.1 Units of measurement Water can be measured on volume basis if it is at rest or on
discharge basis if it is in motion. Volume is measured in litres, milliliters, ha-cm, ha-m, cubic
metre etc., depending upon the magnitude and purpose of measurement. Large quantity of water
present in a reservoir may be measured in m3. Volume of water applied to a field can be suitably
measured as ha-cm. Water in motion or discharge can be measured as litres per second (lps),
litres per minute (lpm), cubic metre per hour (m3/hr) etc. It is the volume of water passing
through a section per unit time.
47
16.6.2 Methods of measuring water
Different methods are used for measurement of water and they depend on the size of the
stream and the available facility. The commonly used methods are
(i) volumetric method,
(ii) velocity-area method in which velocity is measured by using float, current-meter
etc.,
(iii) measuring structures like weir, orifice, parshall flame etc.
16.6.2.1 Volumetric method of water measurement This is the most simple and accurate
method and can be used to measure small discharge flowing through a channel or a pipe. In case
of flow through a channel, some drop is necessary to allow the container to be placed below the
channel level for collection of the discharge. Time to fill a known volume of the container is
noted with the help of a stop watch. Discharge is obtained by dividing the volume of fill by the
required time (Fig.34). For example, if a 210 litres capacity barrel is filled in 30 seconds, the
discharge is 7 lps.
16.6.2.2 Float method
This is one of the simplest methods and gives appropriate velocity of flow in a channel if
no other means is available. Any object that flows in water but does not obstruct wind or get
carried away by it, can be used as a float. A dry wood of about 1 cm3 size serves the purpose
best. A straight section of the channel of about 30 meter length is selected such that the
crosssection is almost uniform through the length. The float is allowed to move from the
upstream to the downstream end and time taken to move this 30 meter distance is measured.
Several measurements are taken and the average time is noted. The distance divided by the time
gives the average surface velocity. The surface velocity is always higher than the average stream
velocity. Therefore, the surface velocity is multiplied by a factor of 0.85 to get the average
velocity.
The cross-sectional area of the stream is measured at least in 3 places and the average is
taken. The average velocity is multiplied by the average cross-sectional area gives the discharge:
Q =A×V
Where, Q= discharge, m3/s,
A= cross-sectional area, m2
V= average velocity of flow, m/s.
48
Lecture No. 17
Crop-Water Management-Problems
49
Lecture No.18
Irrigation - definition, classification of irrigation projects based on Culturable Command
Area (CCA) and expenditure, benefits of irrigation, ill effects of irrigation, flow irrigation
and lift irrigation. Water sources. Irrigation Methods
18.0 Irrigation
Irrigation is an artificial application of water for the purpose of crop production.
Irrigation water is supplied to supplement the water available from (i) rainfall and (ii)
contribution of soil moisture from ground water. In many areas, the amount and timing of
rainfall are not adequate to meet the moisture requirement of the crops. Hence irrigation is
essential. Scientific management of irrigation water provides best insurance against weather
induced fluctuations in total food production. Water is being a limited source, it should not only
meet the requirement of crop production, but also meet the requirement of
(i) growing industry
(ii) human and live stock consumption
(iv) hydro electric power generation and
(v) navigation.
18.1 Classification of irrigation works
Irrigation projects are classified into three categories based on culturable command area
(CCA) and the financial limits on expenditure involved in project cost. Based on CCA, the
irrigation projects are classified into:
(i) Major irrigation projects: Irrigated area of > 10,000 ha.
(ii) Medium irrigation projects: Irrigated area between 2000 to 10,000 ha.
(iii) Minor irrigation projects: less than < 2,000 ha.
Based on financial limits on expenditure involved in the project, irrigation works are classified
into: (i) Major irrigation project: Project cost above Rs. 50 million
(ii) Medium irrigation project: Project cost in between Rs. 2.5 to 50 million
(iii) Minor irrigation project: Project cost less than Rs. 2.5 million.
Major and medium irrigation projects are generally ground together for the purpose of
execution. Mostly the project execution is taken up by state irrigation departments. These
projects comprise of dams, network of canals and related structures. They require substantial
financial investments and are therefore, constructed only by government organizations. The
minor irrigation projects consist of irrigation tanks, canals, diversion works, antisea intrusion
works and almost all the ground water schemes.
Main types of irrigation:
50
I Direct Irrigation or river - canal irrigation phases:
(a) Diversion of water from river
(b) Conveyance of water to land
(c) Application of water to land
II. Storage Irrigation phases:
(a) Diversion of water from river
(b) Conveyance of water to land
(c) Application of water to land
III Sub soil water irrigation phases:
(a) Lifting of water from wells
(b) Application of water to land
18.1.1 Benefits of irrigation
a) It assures proper and successful growth of crop because of assured supply of water.
b) Irrigation protects people from the occurrence of famines, when rain water is severely
deficient.
c) The owner of agricultural land is a gainer as the value of the land increases if it is situated
nearer to the canal.
d) Hydro-electric power can be generated from the falls on some canal or by the water stored in
a storage reservoir.
e) Some large canals can serve the dual purpose of irrigation and land navigation purpose.
f) Irrigation works are a paying concern to the government.
18.1.2 Disadvantages of irrigation:
(i) The land become alkaline and water logged if excess irrigation water is applied to the land, as
a result the land become infertile and barren.
(ii) Excess irrigation water remains into pools on the surface of the ground, will breed
mosquitoes, and cause malaria in the nearby areas.
18.1.3 Water sources
Water for irrigation is obtained from natural streams or rivers, from surface reservoirs
and from underground reservoirs. Flood water from rivers is collected in surface reservoirs by
constructing dams at suitable sites. Runoff water from small areas can also be collected by
constructing ponds or tanks. Water from underground reservoirs is utilized by constructing wells
and installing pumps or other water lifts. Water from surface reservoirs is taken through canals.
Canals run from higher to lower elevations, and water flows in them by the force of gravity.
Based on whether the source of water is above or below the field surface, irrigation is classified
into two types: (i) flow irrigation and (ii) lift irrigation.
51
18.1.4 Flow irrigation When irrigation water in canals is available at such a level that it can
flow over the adjoining land by gravity is known as flow irrigation.
18.1.5 Lift irrigation When water has to be lifted up before it could be applied on land by
gravity is called lift irrigation.
Surface Methods of Irrigation
18.2 Introduction
Surface irrigation method refers to the manner or plan of water application by gravity
flow to the cultivated land wetting either the entire field (uncontrolled flooding) or part of the
field (furrows, basins, border strips). Most irrigated areas have characteristic land features and
differ from those in other areas. Hence, for efficient application of water it is important to select
such method of irrigation, which fits one‟s own land. In doing so it may be necessary, or
desirable, to use more than one method of irrigation in an area or a given farm.
The adoption of a certain method need not be necessarily based on convention or that
followed in the adjoining farm. The factors, which determine the suitable method of irrigation
are local conditions (soil type - its permeability & water storage capacity; land topography,
climate, water availability & water quality), crop type, type of technology, previous experience
with irrigation, required labour inputs etc. Good yield of crops can be obtained from irrigated
land only if the water is applied judiciously to meet the needs of the plant, but not to cause waste
and damage. Irrigation water is applied to cultivated land by the following surface methods of
irrigation:
Surface Irrigation Methods
Uncontrolled Surface flooding
Controlled Surface flooding
Basin Border Strip Furrows
C h e c k Ring
Deep
Corrugation
Basin Basin
Furrow
18.3 Wild flooding
It consists of applying water to the field without any bunds to guide the flow of water
wetting the soil surface completely. Generally it is practiced only when irrigation water is
abundant and where land leveling is not followed. Sometimes it is also adopted in the initial
52
stages of land development. This method is most commonly used for irrigation of crops sown by
broadcasting method viz., rice, low value pastures, lawns and millets etc.
Advantages
1. No land leveling & land shaping
2. Low labour and land preparation costs
3. Less skill required by irrigator
Disadvantages
1. Applied water is lost by deep percolation & surface runoff
2. Low irrigation application efficiency
18.4 Controlled flooding
18.4.1 Check basin method
In this method the field is divided into square or rectangular plots of 4 to 4000 m2 guided
by bunds on all the sides (Fig. 18.1). This method is usually practiced in nearly levelled lands,
thus no run-off of soil or water takes place and wetting depth is more uniform. However, it is
particularly useful on fine textured soils with low permeability rate where it is necessary to hold
the water on the surface to secure adequate penetration. The field channels supply water to each
basin, during which the basins are filled to desired depth and water is retained until it infiltrates
into the soil. This method is most commonly used for irrigating crops like groundnut, finger
millet, sorghum, vegetable crops etc. Check basins are also used for leaching salts below the crop
root zone depth by percolating water in the reclamation of saline soils.
Advantages
1. Water can be applied uniformly.
2. Even small streams can be used for irrigation of crops efficiently.
3. Simple and cheap when equipment is used for constructing bunds
Disadvantages
1. Unless the land is levelled, distribution of water in plot is uneven.
2. Considerable area is lost under field channels and bunds i.e. nearly 30% of area.
3. Bunds interfere in working of inter-cultivation equipment
4. More labour is required for field layout and irrigation
18.4.2 Ring basin method This method is a modification of check basin method and is suitable
for sparsely grown orchard crops and cucurbits (Fig. 18.2).
53
Fig. 18.1. Check basin method of irrigation Fig. 18.2 Ring basin method of irrigation
In this method a circular bund is constructed around each tree/plant or group of
plants/trees to create a basin for irrigation. These basins are suitably connected to irrigation
conveyance channels is such a way that either each basin is irrigated separately or group of
basins by flowing water from one basin to another through inter- connections.
Advantages
1. High irrigation application efficiency can be achieved with properly designed system
2. Unskilled labour can be used, as there is no danger of erosion
Disadvantages
1. High labour requirement
2. Bunds restrict use of modern machinery in the field
3. Limited to relatively uniform lands
18.4.3 Border strip method The cultivated field to be irrigated is divided into a number of long
parallel strips, generally 5 to 15 m in width and 75 to 300 m in length separated by small border
ridges or low dykes of about 15 cm high, laid out in the direction of the slope (Fig. 18.3).
The objective is to advance a sheet of water down the narrow strip of land, allowing it to
enter the soil as the sheet advances. Irrigation water is released into each strip connected directly
to irrigation channel situated at the upstream end of the border strip. After sufficient water has
been applied to one strip, the irrigation stream is turned into another strip. A specific requirement
in border irrigation is that the longitudinal slope must be uniform, and the transverse slope must
be zero or negligible (< 0.03%). This method is suitable for irrigating a wide variety of close
growing crops such as wheat, barley, groundnut, bajra and berseem.
Advantages
1. Large water streams can be used safely
2. Provides uniform wetting of soil profile
3. Low labour requirement
54
Fig. 18.3. Border strip method of irrigation Fig. 8.4 Furrow method of irrigation
Disadvantages
1. Requires relatively large water streams for quick advance of water to minimize deep
percolation losses at the upper end of the border strip.
2. Wastage of water by deep percolation in coarse textured soils.
18.4.4 Deep furrow method
In furrow method of irrigation, the flat bed surface is converted into a series of ridges and
furrows running down the slope (Fig. 18.4). The spacing of the furrow is ordinarily determined
by the spacing of row crop. The length of the furrow and slope depends on several factors viz.,
texture, intake rate etc.
Depending on the soil, crop spacing, farm equipment used etc spacing between furrows
varies from 60 to 120 cm. Depending on the soil texture furrow length ranges from 20 to 300 m
or even more. To avoid overtopping and scouring problems furrow inflow rates are normally
limited to 2 to 15 m3/hr/furrow. This method can be used either with small or large streams of
irrigation water because it can be diverted into any number of furrows. Slope along the furrows
may range from 0.2 to 2%. Where the land is too slopy (>5%), the furrows must be constructed
on contours. Among the various surface irrigation methods, there is a relative saving of water in
furrow method; hence efficient use of water is possible. In case of limited water, alternate
furrows may be irrigated without much adverse effect on the crop yield. This method is
commonly used for irrigating crops like potato, sugarcane, maize, cotton, melons, sugar beets
and vegetables like lettuce.
When furrow irrigation is practiced under saline and alkaline conditions, the lateral
movement of soil moisture coupled with evaporation causes salt to accumulate in the ridges
between furrows. If the salt accumulation reaches harmful levels, planting is advocated on the
relatively salt free bottom of the furrows following pre-plant irrigation.
Advantages
1. Fairly high irrigation application efficiency among surface irrigation methods
55
2. Furrows serve as field drains in areas of heavy rainfall
3. Low evaporation losses
Disadvantages
1. Not suitable in coarse textured soils with high infiltration rates
2. Possibility of intra-furrow soil erosion
3. Labour intensive
18.4.5 Corrugations
This is a special method of furrow irrigation. Corrugations or rills are shallow furrows running
down the slope from head ditches or laterals, which are sometimes very close to each other.
Water moves down through several corrugations simultaneously and soaks laterally
through the soil, wetting the area between the corrugations. This method is used for irrigating
close growing crops, which do not require inter-culture operations and may also be used in
conjunction with border irrigation. Corrugations are often used in fine textured soils that take
water slowly and in soils, which tend to seal over and crust when flooded. The spacing and size
of the corrugations vary with soil type, but in general, the more porous the soil, the more closely
spaced the corrugations to permit rapid wetting between them without excessive deep percolation
losses. The length of the corrugations should be such that upper end of the field has not been
over irrigated by the time the lower end has received sufficient water.
18.5 Sub-surface irrigation
Sub-surface irrigation is the method of applying water beneath the soil surface; close to
the plant roots so that either water seeps from the sides of the channels towards the plant roots or
through capillary movement upward. It is usually done by creating an artificial water surface at
some pre-determined depth, about 30 – 75 cm below the ground, depending upon the texture and
rooting characteristics of the crop. Application efficiencies vary from 30-80% depending upon
conditions. Water having high salt content cannot be used. This method is expensive, difficult to
maintain and operate, and suitable only for few crops. Because of high investment required, it
has not been widely adopted in India.
56
Lecture No.19
Sprinkler Method of Irrigation
19.1 Sprinkler Method of Irrigation
19.1.1 Introduction
Sprinkler irrigation is a method of applying irrigation water which is similar to natural
rainfall (Fig. 8.6). Water is conveyed under desired pressure (2 to 5 kg/cm2) developed by a
pump through a network of pipes, called mainlines and sub mains to one or more laterals and is
sprayed in to the air through sprinkler nozzles or perforations so that it breaks up in to small
water drops (0.5 to 4mm in size) which fall over the land or crop surface in an uniform pattern at
a rate (0.06-5000 LPH) less than the infiltrability of soil. The pump supply system, sprinklers
and operating conditions must be designed to enable a uniform application of water.
Sprinkler irrigation systems may be classified as portable, semiportable, semipermanent
or permanent. They are also classified as set-move (hand-move, tow-move, side-roll and gun-
type systems), solid-set or continuous move sprinkler (center-pivot, traveler and linear-move)
systems (Fig. 19.1).
Fig. 19.1 Sprinkler irrigation systems
19.1.2 Advantages
a) Elimination of field channels and their maintenance, which increase the production area
b) Harmful ditch weeds, which have allelopethic effects, do not appear with sprinkler irrigation.
c) No water losses in conveyance, which amounts to 35% in surface irrigation methods
d) Close control over water application i.e., no runoff losses because water is applied below or
equal to infiltration rate.
e) Convenient for giving light and frequent irrigations.
f) Higher application efficiency over surface methods of irrigation.
g) Sprinklers give a gentle rain that does not clog or compact the soil ensuring better and quicker
germination of seeds resulting in more plants per unit area
h) Suitable in undulated lands, soils with shallow depth and areas located at higher elevation than
the water source.
57
i) Feasibility of frequent, short water applications for germination, cooling & frost protection to
plants, etc.
j) Higher yield and water saving over surface irrigation methods
19.1.3 Limitations
a) Uneven distribution of water due to high wind velocities particularly during summer season.
b) Higher evaporation losses when operating under high temperatures.
c) Mechanical difficulties such as sprinklers fail to rotate, nozzles may clog, couplers may leak
or engine may require repair.
d) Initial investment and recurrent operating costs are much higher than in surface irrigation
methods.
e) Moving the portable lines, when the soil is wet results in the destruction of soil structure
f) Use of saline water for irrigation is not possible since it will be harmful to crops
g) Higher water pressure required hence extra energy cost
19.1.4 Sprinkler System Components & Layout
A typical sprinkler irrigation system consists of a pumping unit, pump connector, non-
return valve, water meter, pressure gauge, pressure regulators, mainline & submainlines, laterals,
control valves, hydrants, sprinkler base, sprinkler heads, bends, tees, reducers, end plug, nipples,
flanges etc (Fig. 19.2).
The most common type of sprinkler system layout is shown below in Fig. 19.3. The
pump unit is usually a centrifugal pump which takes water from the source and provides
adequate pressure for delivery into the pipe system.
Fig. 19.2 Sprinkler System Components
58
Fig. 19.3 Sprinkler System Components
19.2 Suitable crops
Sprinkler irrigation is suited for most field crops viz., wheat, lucerne, groundnut, bengal
gram, green gram, black gram, potato, leafy vegetables, sunflower, barley, bajra, maize, wheat
etc wherein water can be sprayed over the crop canopy (Fig. 22.5). However, large sprinklers are
not recommended for irrigation of delicate crops such as lettuce because the large water drops
produced by the sprinklers may damage the crop. Water containing specific ions such as sodium
and chlorides in concentration of more than 3 meq/litre are not suitable for irrigation by overhead
sprinklers.
59
Lecture No. 20
Drip Irrigation Method -Introduction-Advantages
Drip Method of Irrigation
20.1. Introduction
Irrigation advancements within the last 2 decades have been astounding. Drip or trickle
irrigation is one of the latest innovations for applying water, and represents a definite
advancement in irrigation technology. Drip irrigation is defined as the precise, slow and frequent
application of small quantities of water to the soil in the form of discrete drops, continuous
drops, and tiny streams through emitters located at selected points along a water delivery lateral
line. It differs from sprinkler irrigation by the fact that only part of the soil surface is wetted.
Current drip irrigation technology dates back to the work of Symcha Blass (1964). Based on the
observation that a large tree near a leaking faucet exhibited a more vigorous growth than other
trees in the area, he developed the first patented drip irrigation system. From Israel, the concept
spread to Australia, North America and South Africa by the late 1960s, and eventually
throughout the world. The availability of low cost plastic pipe for water delivery lateral lines
helped to speed up the field use of drip irrigation system. At present the largest area is in the
USA and Spain (1.5 million ha each) followed by India (1.43 million ha). Total coverage in the
world has increased from 4000 ha in 1972 to over 8 million ha in 2008.
20.1.1 Surface drip irrigation:
The application of water to the soil surface as drops or tiny streams through emitters with
discharges rate for point-source emitters less than 8 L/h for single outlet emitter and for line-
source emitters less than 4 L/h (Fig. 20.1). Often the terms drip and trickle irrigation are
considered synonymous.
Fig 20.1 Surface drip irrigation in bhendi and Mango crop
60
20.1.2 Subsurface drip irrigation: The application of water below the soil surface through
emitters, with discharge rate generally in the range of 0.6 to 3 L/h. This method of water
application is different from and not to be confused with the method where the root zone is
irrigated by water table control, herein referred to as subirrigation (Fig. 23.2).
Fig.20.2 Subsurface drip irrigation in Potato
20.2 Advantages
Many reports have listed and summarized potential advantages of drip irrigation as compared to
other irrigation methods.
a) Enhanced plant growth, crop yield and premium quality produce
b) Water Saving due to increased beneficial use of available water and higher water application
efficiency
c) Precise and uniform delivery of water to crops due to controlled water application
d) Maintenance of higher soil water potential in the root zone
e) Compact and efficient root system
f) Combined water and fertilizer (fertigation) application minimizes nutrient losses and improves
fertilizer use efficiency and contributes to fertilizer saving in some crops
g) Reduced salinity hazards to crop plants when low quality saline water is used for irrigation
h) Suitable for irrigating high-value crops raised in greenhouses, plastic tunnels, potted plants
and under plastic mulches
i) Lower operating pressures means reduced pumping energy costs
j) Limited weed growth because only a fraction of the soil surface is irrigated
61
k) Reduced operational and labour costs due to improved weed control and simultaneous
application of water, fertilizers, herbicide, insecticide, fungicide and other additives through the
drip irrigation system
l) Feasible to irrigate crops raised in small & irregularly shaped narrow lawns, and on undulated
land terrains
m) Maintenance of dry foliage means improved disease and pest management
n) Suitable to highly permeable & low water holding sandy and desert soils, saline and slowly
permeable alkaline soils, wastelands, slopy lands and rocky hills, road embankments, abandoned
mine areas etc
o) Improved and continuous cultural operations such as spraying, weeding, thinning and
harvesting of tree and row crops is possible without interrupting the drip irrigation cycle for any
prolonged period of time.
p) Environmental protection and ecological security
20.3 Limitations
Despite observed successes, some important possible limitations of drip irrigation as compared
to other irrigation methods have been encountered for some soils, water quality and
environmental conditions, which include:
a) Sensitivity to emitter clogging
b) Salt accumulation in soil
c) Mechanical damage to system components
d) Lack of microclimate control such as frost protection and evaporative cooling.
e) Operational constraints such as high technical skills, stringent filtration and operating
pressures etc
20.4 Drip Irrigation System Layout and Components
The drip irrigation system consists of three subsystems viz., control head unit, water carrier
system and water distribution system besides water source & pumping station (Fig. 20.3).
a) Head control unit – Non return valve, Air release valve, Vacuum breaker, Filtration unit,
Fertigation unit, Throttle valve, Pressure gauge, Water meter, Pressure regulator and Pressure
relief valve.
b) Water carrier system – PVC main pipeline, PVC submain pipeline, Control valve, Flush valve
and other fittings
c) Water distribution system – Drip lateral, Emitters, Grommet, Start connecter, Nipple, End cap.
62
Fig.20.3 Drip head control unit and System Components
20.5 Suitable crops
Drip irrigation, like other irrigation methods, will not fit every agricultural crop, specific site or
objective. Presently drip irrigation has the greatest potential in the following crops:
a) Fruit crops – Mango, citrus, grapes, guava, pomegranate, banana, papaya, watermelon, Litchi,
Fig, Ber, Amla, Sapota etc
b) Vegetable crops – Tomato, Brinjal, Bhendi, Cabbage, Cauliflower, Capsicum, Chillies gourds
etc
c) Plantation crops – Oil palm, Coconut, Arecanut, Cashewnut, Coffee, Tea etc
d) Field crops – Cotton, Sugarcane, Tobacco, Sugarbeet, Castor etc
e) Tuber & Bulb crops – Potato, Cassava, Onion, Sweet potato, Radish, Colocasia etc
f) Spices – Turmeric, Ginger, Cardamom etc
g) Flowers – Roses, Rose, Gerbera, Orchids, Anthurium, Gladiolus, Carnations, Jasmine,
Chrysanthemum, Marigold etc.
Further this method of irrigation continuous to be important in greenhouse production of
vegetables & flowers. Drip irrigation is also used for landscaping of parks, highways,
commercial developments and residences. As labour, water and land preparation costs increase,
more drip irrigation systems will be substituted for conventional irrigation methods.
63
20.6. Drip irrigation components
The components of micro irrigation system can be grouped into two major groups (Fig.50):
i) Head control unit and
ii) Distribution network.
Head control unit: The head control unit consists of micro irrigation system includes the
following components.
1. Pump/overhead tank: It is required to provide sufficient pressure in the system. Centrifugal
pumps are generally used for low pressure trickle systems. Overhead tanks can be used for small
areas or orchard crops with comparatively lesser water requirements.
2. Fertilizer applicator: Application of fertilizer into pressurized irrigation system is done by
either a by-pass pressure tank or by venture injector or direct injection system.
3. Filters: The hazard of blocking or clogging necessitates the use of filters for efficient and
trouble free operation of the micro irrigation system. The different types of filters used in micro
irrigation system are described below.
a) Gravel or media filter: Media filters consists of fine gravel or coarse quartz sand, of selected
sizes (usually 1.5 to 4 mm in diameter), free of calcium carbonate placed in a cylindrical tank.
These filters are effective in removing light suspended materials such as algae and other organic
materials, fine sand and silt particles. This type of filtration is essential for primary filtration of
irrigation water from open water reservoirs, canals or reservoirs in which algae may develop.
Water is introduced at the top, while a layer of coarse gravel is put near the outlet bottom.
Reversing the direction of flow and opening the water drainage valve cleans the filters. Pressure
gauges are placed at the inlet and at the outlet ends of the filter to measure the head loss across
the filter. If the head loss exceeds more than 30 kPa filter needs back washing.
b) Screen filters: Screen filters are always installed for final filtration as an additional safeguard
against clogging. While majority of impurities are filtered by sand filter, minute sand particles
and other small impurities pass through it. The screen filter, containing screen strainer, which
filters physical impurities allows only clean water to enter into the micro irrigation system. The
screens are usually cylindrical and made of noncorrosive metal or plastic material. These are
available in a wide variety of types and flow rate capacities with screen sizes ranging from 20
mesh to 200 mesh. The aperture size of the screen opening should be between 1/7th and 1/10th
of the orifice size of emission device.
4. Pressure relief valves, regulators or bye pass arrangement: These valves may be installed
at any point where possibility exists for excessively high pressures, either static or surge
pressures to occur. A bye pass arrangement is simplest and cost effective means to avoid
problems of high pressures instead of using costly pressure relief valves.
64
5. Check valves or non return valves: These valves are used to prevent unwanted flow
reversal. They are used to prevent damaging back flow from the system to avoid return flow of
chemicals and fertilizers from the system into the water source itself to avoid contamination of
water source.
Distribution network: It mainly constitutes main line, sub mains, line and laterals with drippers
and other accessories (Fig.50).
1. Main line: The main line transports water within the field and distribute to sub mains. Main
line is made of rigid PVC and high density polyethylene (HDPE). Pipe lines of 65 mm diameter
and above with a pressure rating of 4 to 6 kg/cm2 are used as main pipes.
2. Sub mains: Sub mains distribute water evenly to a number of lateral pipes. For sub main
pipes, rigid PVC, HDPE or LDPE (Low density polyethylene) of diameter ranging from 32 mm
to 75 mm having pressure rating of 2.5 kg/cm2 are used.
3. Laterals: Laterals distribute the water uniformly along their length by means of drippers or
emitters. These are normally manufactured from LDPE. Generally pipes having 10, 12 and 16
mm internal diameter with wall thickness varying from 1 to 3 mm are used as lateral.
4. Drippers: They function as energy dissipaters, reducing the inlet pressure head ( 0.5 to 1.5
atmospheres) to zero atmospheres at the outlet.
The commonly used drippers are online pressure compensating or online non-pressure
compensating, in-time dripper, adjustable discharge type drippers and micro tubing of 1 to 4 mm
diameter. These are manufactured from poly-propylene or LDPE.
a) Online pressure compensating drippers: A pressure compensating type dripper supplies
water uniformly on long rows and on uneven slopes. These are most suitable on slopes and
difficult topographic terrains.
b) Online non-pressure compensating drippers: In such type of drippers, discharge tends to
vary with operating pressure. These are cheap and available in affordable price.
c) In line drippers or In line tubes: These are fixed along with the line i.e., the pipe is cut and
dripper is fixed in between the cut ends, such that it makes a continuous row after fixing the
dripper. These types of drippers are suitable for row crops.
65
Lecture No. 21
Pumps –Centrifugal pumps working method
21.0 Pumps
Lift irrigation requires that water be raised from its source to the field surface. Whatever
the source of water in a lift irrigation project, the efficiency of the system depends on the
application of sound principles in the design and construction of utilization structure, usually the
well, and the characteristics of the water lifting device in relation the source of water. Devices
for irrigation water lifting range from age-old indigenous water lifts to highly efficient pumps.
Pumps operated by electric motors or engines have come into prominence in all large scale lift
irrigation schemes. This is because high output and efficiency levels can be more easily attained
and controlled, using mechanically powered water lifts.
Basically, there are four principles involved in pumping water from source. These are
atmospheric pressure, positive displacement, centrifugal force, and movement of columns of
water caused by difference in specific gravity. Numerous kinds of pumps are available, all of
which use one or more of these principles. The classification of commonly used irrigation water
lifts is shown in fig.21.1. Selection of a suitable water lifting device for a particular situation
depends on the characteristics of the source of water and the lifting device, the amount of water
to be lifted, the depth to the pumping water level, type and amount of power available and the
economic status of the farmer. Most commonly used pumps are centrifugal pumps, vertical
turbine pumps, and submerged pumps. Pump is a machine that lifts water from source (open
wells, tube wells or deep wells) to ground surface. Pumps are generally two types:
1) Indigenous water lifts.
2) Highly efficient irrigation pumps.
Fig.21.1 Classification Pumps
66
21.1 Centrifugal pumps In modern times, centrifugal pump is most commonly used for
irrigation purpose. During the last 60 years, centrifugal pumps have replaced most of the other
types of pumps and today they are the most popular pumps. Centrifugal pumps usually give
efficient operation over relatively wide range of operating conditions especially if the total head
exceeds 4 meters. The centrifugal pump draws water from the source of supply to the pump.
Therefore, its use is limited to locations where this distance is within the limits of suction. Where
this limit exceeds, horizontal centrifugal pumps cannot be used and deep well turbine pumps or
submersible pumps should be used.
21.2 Advantages of centrifugal pump This pump is very popular due to: (i) lower initial cost,
(ii) greater flexibility in application, (iii) wide working range in size and capacity, (iv) simplicity
in construction, (v) constant steady discharge, and (vi) easy in operation, and (v) easy in
operation, maintenance and repair.
21.3 Principle of operation The pump consists of two basic components: (i) Impeller, and (ii)
Casing. The impeller is rotated at high speed by an electric motor or an engine. As soon as the
impeller starts rotating, the blades cause the water to rotate with the impeller and impart high
velocity to the water. Hence, water in the impeller (filled up by priming in the beginning) moves
from the eye (centre of the impeller) to the periphery, negative pressure is created at the eye due
to which water rushes from the water source to the eye or outside the casing where pressure head
is built up. The static water in the well is at the atmospheric pressure, so the water rushes into the
suction pipe due to difference of pressure. In this way, continuous flow of water is maintained in
the pump. The centrifugal pump so called because the pressure increases with in the casing due
to centrifugal forces. The pump will not work until the casing and the suction pipe are full of
water by priming. Priming: It is the process of removing air from pump casing and suction pipe
by filling water in the suction pipe. The ump will not work if there is any air left in the suction
pipe.
67
21.4 Classification of centrifugal pump Centrifugal pumps can be classified on the following
basis;
a) Type of energy conversion: (a) volute, and (b) diffuser
b) Working head: (a) low lift, (b) medium lift, (c) high lift.
c) Number of impellers per shaft: (a) single stage and (b) multi-stage.
d) Relative direction of flow through impeller: (a) radial flow, (b) mixed flow and (c)axial
flow.
e) Type of suction inlet: (a) single suction and (b) double suction.
f) Axis of rotation: (a) horizontal and (b) vertical.
g) Impeller types: (a) closed impeller, (b) semi-open impeller, (c) open impeller.
h) Method of drive: (a) direct coupled, (b) gear-driven and (c) belt-driven.
21.5 Components and accessories of centrifugal pump
The following are the important components and accessories of a pumping unit (Fig.30): 1.
Impeller. 2. Impeller shaft. 3. Casing. 4. Stuffing box. 5. Suction pipe. 6. Foot valve. 7. Delivery
pipe. 8. Delivery valve. 9. Bearings.
21.5.1 Impeller: It is a wheel or disc mounted on the dry shaft and provided with a no. of curved
blades/ vanes. The impeller is fitted on the shaft with the help of suitable bearing. It is rotated at
high speed with the help of mortar or an IC engine.
Types of impellers
a) Closed,
b) Semi-open and
c) Open impeller pumps
Depending upon the viscosity of the liquid and the solid matter content in the liquid, different
types of impellers namely closed, semi-open and open types are used.
a. Open impeller The impeller is not provided with any side wall or shroud (Fig.21.2). They
are used to handle where water is mixed with sand, gravel, clay, pebbles and other solid
materials. It is generally made of forged steel and it has a short life. These are suitable for
dredging works.
b. Semi-open impeller The impeller is provided with side wall or shroud on one side only
(Fig.21.2). The number of vanes is reduced and their length is increased to reduce the chance of
impeller clogging. Such impellers are suitable for pumping viscous liquids such as paper pulp,
molasses, and sewage water containing foreign materials.
c. Closed impeller The impeller is provided with side wall or shroud on both sides of the vanes
(Fig.21.2). All ordinary centrifugal pumps used to pump clear irrigation water have closed
68
impellers. This is suitable for handling nonviscous liquids free from foreign materials such as
ordinary water, acids, oils etc. The efficiency of semi-open impeller pump is lower than the
closed impeller pumps and higher than the open impeller pump.
Fig.21.2. Types of impellers
21.5.2 Casing: It is a spiral shaped cover having gradually increasing cross sectional area
towards the discharge end. The casing receives water from the impeller and discharges it to the
delivery pipe.
21.5.3 Suction pipe: It is a suitable pipe for limiting water from the well or stream. It is fitted
with suitable foot valve with strainer.
21.5.4 Stainer with foot valve: It is a non return or one way type valve operating towards. The
water will pass through the valve upwards and it won‟t allow water to move downwards. It is
fitted at the bottom of the suction pipe which remains submerged in water. A suitable strainer is
provided at the bottom of the foot valve to prevent floating bodies like leaves or wooden pieces
from entering into suction pipe.
21.5.5 Stuffing box: It is a portion of casing through which the pump shaft extends and in which
the packing and mechanical seal is placed to prevent the leakage.
21.5.6 Delivery pipe: Delivery pipe is a pipe used to deliver water from pump to the desired or
delivery place.
21.5.7 Delivery valve: It is a regulating valve used on the delivery side of the pump. It remains
closed at the start of the pump.
21.5.8 Bearings: Bearings are used to keep the shaft of the pump in correct position.
Couplings are most commonly used to connect pump shaft to motor or engine shaft.
69
Lecture No. 22
Submersible pumps
22. Submersible pumps
A vertical turbine pump close coupled to a small diameter submersible electric motor is
termed a submersible pump, in which both motor and pump are installed inside the well (Fig.33).
The motor is fixed directly below the intake of the pump. The pump element and the motor
operate entirely submerged. The submersible pump has special advantage in a location where
theft is a problem. The principal advantage of the submersible pump is that it can be used in a
very deep tube well where a long shaft would not be practical. These pumps are also less affected
by deviations in vertical alignment of wells. As the submersible pump has no above-ground
working parts, it can be used where flooding may be a hazard. It is suitable for installation in
small diameter wells of up to a minimum 100 mm. In India, private tube wells constructed by the
farmers are of shallow type with their diameters in the range of 75 to 100 mm. They are
generally operated by centrifugal pumps installed on the ground surface. The performance
characteristics of the submersible pump are similar to the vertical turbine pump.
22.1 Pump construction It consists of a Pump and motor assembly, a head assembly, a
discharge column and a water proof cable to supply power to the submerged motor.
Pump element: The construction of the pump element is similar to the vertical turbine pump.
The propelling shaft, usually made of stainless steel, is very short and on which the bronze
impellers are mounted. The impellers may be closed semi-open or open. The closed impeller is
generally used where it is necessary for the pump to develop high pressure. Water enters the
pump through a screen located between motor and the pump.
Electric motor
The submersible electric motor has the same diameter as the pump bowl, but it is longer
than the ordinary motor. These motors usually are of dry type. The dry motor is enclosed in a
steel case filled with a light oil of high dielectric strength. A mercury seal placed directly above
the armature prevents oil leakage or water entrance at that point where the drive shaft passes
through the case to the impellers. Submersible electrical motors are designed for long service
without attention. If the motor failure occurs, the entire pump must be lifted from the well.
The stator windings are continuous for the whole length of the motor. The electrical
cables, leading from the motor to the starting box on the ground surface, are water-proof and are
placed outside the discharge pipe.
22.2 Installation
A concrete base is constructed on the surface which covers the well casing and the head
assembly rests on it. The head assembly is connected to the pump with the help of the discharge
pipe. The pump assembly should be sufficiently lowered inside the well by using a long pipe so
that it is always submerged. No pump-house is required as the pump and motor assembly
remains in the well. The control panel consisting of the switch, meter, and starter are enclosed in
a water-proof box.
70
Lecture No. 23
Losses due to friction in pumps Problems
This kinetic energy of a liquid coming out of an impeller is harnessed by creating a
resistance to the flow. The first resistance is created by the pump volute (casing) that catches the
liquid and slows it down. In the discharge nozzle, the liquid further decelerates and its velocity is
converted to pressure according to Bernoulli‟s principle. Therefore, the head (pressure in terms
of height of liquid) developed is approximately equal to the velocity energy at the periphery of
the impeller expressed by the following well-known formula:
H=
H= Total head developed in feet.
v= Velocity at periphery of impeller in m/sec.
g= Acceleration due to gravity 9.81 m/sec
d= Diameter of the pipe (in meters)
23.1. Friction Head (h): The head required to overcome the resistance to flow in the pipe and
f
fittings. It is dependent upon the size, condition and type of pipe, number and type of
pipefittings, flow rate, and nature of the liquid.
h = Friction Head
f
f = Constant
l = length of pipe (in mtrs)
v = flow velocity (in m/sec)
g = gravitational force
d = density of pipe (in mtrs)
h = 4flv2/2gd
f
23.2. Capacity
Capacity means the flow rate with which liquid is moved or pushed by the pump to the desired
point in the process. It is commonly measured in either gallons per minute (gpm) or cubic meters
per hour (m3/hr). The capacity usually changes with the changes in operation of the process. For
example, a boiler feed pump is an application that needs a constant pressure with varying
capacities to meet a changing steam demand.
The capacity depends on a number of factors like:
 Process liquid characteristics i.e. density, viscosity
 Size of the pump and its inlet and outlet sections
 Impeller size
 Impeller rotational speed RPM
 Size and shape of cavities between the vanes
71
 Pump suction and discharge temperature and pressure conditions
Q = Capacity /head (in lit./sec)
A = Area (in hectares)
D = Depth of irrigation (in cms)
E = time of irrigation (in days)
H = Pump working hours (in hrs)
Q = 28AD/EH
72
Lecture No. 24
73
Lecture No. 25
Irrigation water Measuring devises
25.1Measurement of irrigation water -Direct discharge methods - water meter, weirs,
orifices.
25.1.1 Current meter method
Two types of current meters namely; the cup type (Fig.35) and the propeller type (Fig.36)
are used for measurement of velocity in irrigation channels, flumes, streams or rivers. The cup
type current meter consists of a wheel having several cups and the propeller type consists of
vanes or propeller attached to a rod. When the meter is placed in flowing water, the velocity of
water rotates the wheel or the vane. In case of shallow streams, the current meter is suspended
from a rod and for measurement in deep water, a cable is used to suspend the meter. In large
rivers, a boat is used to take readings inside the river. Sometimes the current meter is suspended
from a bridge if available. As the wheel rotates, the revolution is recorded in a counter. A
calibration chart or a graph gives the relationship between the revolution per minute and the
velocity. The average velocity is obtained by taking the average of the velocities at 0.8 and 0.2 of
the depth from the top. In case of shallow stream, if it is not possible to take the reading at 0.8 of
the depth from the surface, only one reading may be taken at 0.6 of the depth from the surface.
25.1.2 Weirs
A weir is a notch or opening of some definite shape installed on a channel or a stream
through which water falls. May materials like wood, concrete, mild steel, rigid PVC etc. can be
used for construction of a weir. Mainly a cut on a sheet metal is used for fabrication of weirs, to
be installed at various locations in a channel. Weirs can be classified as (i) broad crested and (ii)
sharp crested weirs. The sharp crested weir is mostly used for measurement of irrigation water. It
is nothing but, a weir with thin edge such that the sheet of water flowing over it has the minimum
contact area with it.
The bottom most portion of the weir in touch with the water is called the weir crest. The
sheet of water flowing over the weir is called the nappe (Fig.31.3). The top surface is the upper
nappe and the bottom surface is the lower nappe. The depth of flow over the crest is known as
head (H). It is measured at a minimum distance of 4 H upstream from the crest. The horizontal
distance from the end of the crest to the side of the channel is known as end contraction. If both
ends of the crest are away from the sides of the channel, then there are two end contractions. If
the length of the crest is same as the width of the channel, then there is no end contraction. The
weir is said to have free flow condition, if the surface of water downstream is below the crest
level so that the nappe is surrounded by air. If the downstream water level is higher than the weir
crest level then it is a submerged flow condition.
74
Fig. 31.4 Profile of a Sharp-crested weir
Apart from being classified as sharp crested and broad crested, weirs can also be
classified according to the shape of the notch.
25.1.2.1 Rectangular weir
The rectangular weir (Fig.31.5a) is used to measure high discharge. Its crest is horizontal
and the sides are vertical. In case, the crest length is same as that of the channel width, it is
known as suppressed weir, otherwise contracted weir.
25.1.2.2 Trapezoidal weir
The trapezoidal weir (Fig.31.5b) has a horizontal crest and the slides slope outward to
give the notch a trapezoidal cross-section Commonly a side slope of 1 horizontal to 4 vertical is
used and it is named as cipoletti weir. It does not require any correction for end contractions and
is used for measurement of medium discharges. Normally it is a sharp crested weir.
25.1.2.3 Triangular or V-notch weir
It is used to measure small to medium discharges. The 90º V-notch weir (Fig.31.5c) is
used to measure low discharges accurately. Thus the sides of the notch make an angle 45 º with
the vertical which gives a slope of 1 horizontal to 1 vertical.
Fig. 6.2. Sharp created weirs (a) rectangular, (b) Cipoletti or trapezoidal and (c) V-notch
or triangular
75
25.1.3 Discharge formulae for weirs.
The basic equation for calculating the discharge through a weir is
Q = CLHm
When Q is the discharge, C is the coefficient which depends upon the nature of the crest
and approach condition, L is the length of the weir crest, H is the head on the crest and m is an
exponent which depends upon the type of weir opening.
The formula for calculating discharge through rectangular weirs with n number of end
contractions is
Q = 0.0184 (L - 0.1 nH) H3/2
Where Q is the discharge in litre per second., L is the length of crest in centimeter and H
is the head on the crest in centimeter.
In case of suppressed weir, number of end contraction is zero and obviously equation is
changed to
Q = 0.0184 LH3/2
The formula for calculating discharge over a Cipoletti weir is
Q = 0.0186 LH3/2
In case of 90 º triangular weir, the discharge equation is
Q = 0.0138 H5/2.
25.1.4 Orifices
An orifice (Fig.41) is an opening in a bulk-head with closed perimeter usually circular or
rectangular cross-section through which water flows. For measurement of water, orifices are
fabricated by making an accurate cut of proper size and shape in a mild steel sheet, aluminum
plate etc. Proper machining is done to have a sharp edge through which water flows. The orifice
flow formulae can be applied only when the orifice flows fully. If it flows partially, it behaves
like a weir.
If the downstream water level is lower than the bottom of the orifice opening, the water
jet discharges freely into the air and then it is said to have a free discharge. If the orifice
discharges under a condition of submergence, it is called submerged weir. In case of free
discharge, the depth of water on the upstream side of the orifice that causes the flow is called the
head. In case of submerged office, the difference of water level in the upstream and downstream
sides is known as the head. No drop as in case of a weir is required for installation of orifices and
therefore, this can be used more widely. The submerged orifice generally has a rectangular
shape.
The discharge through an orifice can be calculated by the following formula:
Q = C X 103 X a
d
76
Q = discharge, liters per second
C = Coefficient of discharge, usually taken as 0.62 for sharp edged orifices
d
a = Cross-sectional area of orifice, cm2
g = acceleration due to gravity, cm/s2
H = head of water causing the flow, cm
77
Lecture 26
Introduction to green houses-history, definition, greenhouse effect, advantages of green
houses.
After the advent of green revolution, more emphasis is laid on the quality of the product
along with the quantity of production to meet the ever- growing food requirements. Both these
demands can be met when the environment for the plant growth is suitably controlled. The need
to protect the crops against unfavorable environmental conditions led to the development of
protected agriculture. Greenhouse is the most practical method of achieving the objectives of
protected agriculture, where the natural environment is modified by using sound engineering
principles to achieve optimum plant growth and yields.
26.1 History
A greenhouse is a framed or an inflated structure covered with a transparent or
translucent material in which crops could be grown under the conditions of at least partially
controlled environment and which is large enough to permit persons to work within it to carry
out cultural operations.
The growing of off - season cucumbers under transparent stone for Emperor Tiberius in
the 1st century, is the earliest reported protected agriculture. The technology was rarely
employed during the next 1500 years. In the 16th century, glass lanterns, bell jars and hot beds
covered with glass were used to protect horticultural crops against cold. In the 17th century, low
portable wooden frames covered with an oiled translucent paper were used to warm the plant
environment.
In Japan, primitive methods using oil -paper and straw mats to protect crops from the
severe natural environment were used as long ago the early 1960s. Greenhouses in France and
England during the same century were heated by manure and covered with glass panes. The first
greenhouse in the 1700s used glass on one side only as a sloping roof. Later in the century, glass
was used on both sides. Glasshouses were used for fruit crops such as melons, grapes, peaches
and strawberries, and rarely for vegetable production.
Protected agriculture was fully established with the introduction of polyethylene after the
World war II. The first use of polyethylene as a greenhouse cover was in 1948, when professor
Emery Myers Emmert, at the University of Kentucky, used the less expensive material in place
of more expensive glass.
The total area of glasshouses in the world (1987) was estimated to be 30,000 ha and most
of these were found in North- Western Europe. In contrast to glasshouses, more than half of the
world area of plastic green houses is in Asia, in which China has the largest area. According to
1999 estimates, an area of 6, 82,050 ha were under plastic greenhouses (Table 1.1). In most of
the countries, green houses are made of plastic and glass; the majority is plastic.
78
Glasshouses and rigid plastic houses are longer-life structures, and therefore are most
located in cold regions where these structures can be used throughout the year. In Japan, year
round use of greenhouses is becoming predominant, but in moderate and warm climate regions,
they are still provisional and are only used in winter.
In India, the cultivation in the plastic greenhouses is of recent origin. As per 1994-95
estimates, approximately 100 ha of India are under greenhouse cultivation.
Table 1. Estimated world use of plastic greenhouses (1999)
Region Area (ha)
Europe 1,80,000
Africa and the Middle East 55,000
America 22,350
Asia 4,50,000
China 3,80,000
Japan 51,042
Korea 2,200
World Total 6,82,050
Since 1960, the greenhouse has evolved into more than a plant protector. It is now better
understood as a system of controlled environment agriculture (CEA), with precise control of air
and root temperature, water, humidity, plant nutrition, carbon dioxide and light. The greenhouses
of today can be considered as plant or vegetable factories. Almost every aspect of the production
system is automated, with the artificial environment and growing system under nearly total
computer control.
26.2 Greenhouse Effect
In general, the percentage of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is 0.035% (345 ppm). But,
due to the emission of pollutants and exhaust gases into the atmosphere, the percentage of carbon
dioxide increases which forms a blanket in the outer atmosphere. This causes the entrapping of
the reflected solar radiation from the earth surface. Due to this, the atmospheric temperature
increases, causing global warming, melting of ice caps and rise in the ocean levels which result
in the submergence of coastal lines. This phenomenon of increase in the ambient temperature,
due to the formation of the blanket of carbon dioxide is known as greenhouse effect.
The greenhouse covering material acts in a similar way, as it is transparent to shorter
wave radiation and opaque to long wave radiation.
During the daytime, the shorter wave radiation enters into the greenhouse and gets
reflected from the ground surface. This reflected radiation becomes long wave radiation and is
entrapped inside the greenhouse by the covering material. This causes the increase in the
greenhouse temperature. It is desirable effect from point of view of crop growth in the cold
regions.
79
26.3 Advantages of Greenhouses
The following are the different advantages of using the green house for growing crops
under controlled environment:
1. Throughout the year four to five crops can be grown in a green house due to availability of
required plant environmental conditions.
2. The productivity of the crop is increased considerably.
3. Superior quality produce can be obtained as they are grown under suitably controlled
environment.
4. Gadgets for efficient use of various inputs like water, fertilizers, seeds and plant protection
chemicals can be well maintained in a green house.
5. Effective control of pests and diseases is possible as the growing area is enclosed.
6. Percentage of germination of seeds is high in greenhouses.
7. The acclimatization of plantlets of tissue culture technique can be carried out in a green house.
8. Agricultural and horticultural crop production schedules can be planned to take advantage of
the market needs.
9. Different types of growing medium like peat mass, vermiculate, rice hulls and compost that
are used in intensive agriculture can be effectively utilized in the greenhouse.
10.Export quality produce of international standards can be produced in a green house.
11. When the crops are not grown, drying and related operations of the harvested produce can be
taken up utilizing the entrapped heat.
12.Greenhouses are suitable for automation of irrigation, application of other inputs and
environmental controls by using computers and artificial intelligence techniques.
13. Self-employment for educated youth on farm can be increased.
80
Lecture 27
Brief description of types of green houses, greenhouses based on shape, utility, construction,
covering materials and cost, shade nets.
Greenhouse structures of various types are used successfully for crop production. Although there
are advantages in each type for a particular application, in general there is no single type
greenhouse, which can be considered as the best. Different types of greenhouses are designed to
meet the specific needs.
27.1 Greenhouse type based on shape
Greenhouses can be classified based on their shape or style. For the purpose of
classification, the uniqueness of the cross section of the greenhouses can be considered as a
factor. As the longitudinal section tend to be approximately the same for all types, the
longitudinal section of the greenhouse cannot be used for classification. The cross sections depict
the width and height of the structure and the length is perpendicular to the plane of cross section.
Also, the cross section provides information on the overall shape of the structural members, such
as truss or hoop, which will be repeated on every day.
The commonly followed types of greenhouse based on shape are lean-to, even span,
uneven span, ridge and furrow, saw tooth and quonset.
27.1.1 Lean-to type greenhouse
A lean-to design is used when a greenhouse is placed against the side of an existing
building. It is built against a building, using the existing structure for one or more of its sides
(Fig.27.1). It is usually attached to a house, but may be attached to other buildings. The roof of
the building is extended with appropriate greenhouse covering material and the area is properly
enclosed. It is typically facing south side. The lean-to type greenhouse is limited to single or
double-row plant benches with a total width of 7 to 12 feet. It can be as long as the building it is
attached to. It should face the best direction for adequate sun exposure.
The advantage of the lean-to type greenhouse is that, it usually is close to available
electricity, water, and heat. It is a least expensive structure. This design makes the best use of
sunlight and minimizes the requirement of roof supports. It has the following disadvantages:
limited space, limited light, limited ventilation and temperature control. The height of the
supporting wall limits the potential size of the design. Temperature control is more difficult
because the wall that the greenhouse is built on, may collect the sun's heat while the translucent
cover of the greenhouse may lose heat rapidly. It is a half greenhouse, split along the peak of the
roof.
81
27.1.2 Even span type greenhouse
The even-span is the standard type and full-size structure, the two roof slopes are of
equal pitch and width (Fig.27.1). This design is used for the greenhouse of small size, and it is
constructed on level ground. It is attached to a house at one gable end. It can accommodate 2 or 3
rows of plant benches. The cost of an even-span greenhouse is more than the cost of a lean-to
type, but it has greater flexibility in design and provides for more plants. Because of its size and
greater amount of exposed glass area, the even-span will cost more to heat. The design has a
better shape than a lean-to type for air circulation to maintain uniform temperatures during the
winter heating season. A separate heating system is necessary unless the structure is very close to
a heated building. It will house 2 side benches, 2 walks, and a wide center bench. Several single
and multiple span types are available for use in various regions of India. For single span type the
span in general, varies from 5 to 9 m, whereas the length is around 24 m. The height varies from
2.5 to 4.3 m.
82
Fig. 27.1. Lean-to-type and Even span type Fig.27.2.Uneven and Ridge and furrow type
greenhouses greenhouses
27.1.3 Uneven span type greenhouse
This type of greenhouse is constructed on hilly terrain. The roofs are of unequal width;
make the structure adaptable to the side slopes of hill (Fig. 27.2). This type of greenhouses is
seldom used now-a-days as it is not adaptable for automation.
27.1.4 Ridge and furrow type greenhouse
Designs of this type use two or more A-frame greenhouses connected to one another
along the length of the eave (Fig. 27.2). The eave serves as furrow or gutter to carry rain and
melted snow away. The side wall is eliminated between the greenhouses, which results in a
structure with a single large interior, Consolidation of interior space reduces labour, lowers the
cost of automation, improves personal management and reduces fuel consumption as there is less
exposed wall area through which heat escapes. The snow loads must be taken into the frame
specifications of these greenhouses since the snow cannot slide off the roofs as in case of
individual free standing greenhouses, but melts away. In spite of snow loads, ridge and furrow
83
greenhouses are effectively used in northern countries of Europe and in Canada and are well
suited to the Indian conditions.
27.1.5 Saw tooth type Greenhouse
These are also similar to ridge and furrow type greenhouses except that, there is provision
for natural ventilation in this type. Specific natural ventilation flow path (Fig. 3) develops in a
saw- tooth type greenhouse.
27.1.6 Quonset greenhouse
This is a greenhouse, where the pipe arches or trusses are supported by pipe purling
running along the length of the greenhouse (Fig 27.3). In general, the covering material used for
this type of greenhouses is polyethylene. Such greenhouses are typically less expensive than the
gutter connected greenhouses and are useful when a small isolated cultural area is required.
These houses are connected either in free, standing style or arranged in an interlocking ridge and
furrow.
In the interlocking type, truss members overlap sufficiently to allow a bed of plants to
grow between the overlapping portions of adjacent houses. A single large cultural space thus
exists for a set of houses in this type, an arrangement that is better adapted to the automation and
movement of labour.
Fig. 27.3. Quonset and Saw tooth type greenhouses
27.2 Greenhouse type based on utility
84
Classification of greenhouses can be made depending on the functions or utilities. Of the
different utilities, artificial cooling and heating of the greenhouse are more expensive and
elaborate. Hence based on the artificial cooling and heating, greenhouses are classified as green
houses for active heating and active cooling system.
27.2.1 Greenhouses for active heating
During the night time, air temperature inside greenhouse decreases. To avoid the cold
bite to plants due to freezing, some amount of heat has to be supplied. The requirements for
heating greenhouse depend on the rate at which the heat is lost to the outside environment.
Various methods are adopted to reduce the heat losses, viz., using double layer polyethylene,
thermo pane glasses (Two layers of factory sealed glass with dead air space) or to use heating
systems, such as unit heaters, central heat, radiant heat and solar heating system.
27.2.2 Greenhouses for active cooling
During summer season, it is desirable to reduce the temperatures of greenhouse than the
ambient temperatures, for effective crop growth. Hence suitable modifications are made in the
green house so that large volumes of cooled air is drawn into greenhouse, This type of
greenhouse either consists of evaporative cooling pad with fan or fog cooling. This greenhouse is
designed in such a way that it permits a roof opening of 40% and in some cases nearly 100%.
85
Lecture No. 28
Plant growth greenhouse environment
86
Lecture No. 29
Plant response to greenhouse environments-light, temperature, relative humidity, ventilation
and carbon dioxide and environmental requirement of agriculture and horticulture crops inside
green houses.
The productivity of a crop is influenced not only by its heredity but also by the
microclimate around it. The components of crop microclimate are light, temperature, air
compositions and the nature of the root medium. In open fields, only manipulation of nature of
the root medium by tillage, irrigation and fertilizer application is possible. The closed boundaries
in greenhouse permit control of any one or more of the components of the micro climate.
29.1 Light
The visible light of the solar radiation is a source of energy for plants. Light energy,
carbon dioxide (Co2) and water all enter in to the process of photosynthesis through which
carbohydrates are formed. The production of carbohydrates from carbon dioxide and water in the
presence of chlorophyll, using light energy is responsible for plant growth and reproduction. The
rate of photosynthesis is governed by available fertilizer elements, water, carbon dioxide, light
and temperature.
The photosynthesis reaction can be represented as follows
Chlorophyll
CO + water+ light energy ------------------- carbohydrates + oxygen
2
Plant nutrients
Considerable energy is required to reduce the carbon that is combined with oxygen in
CO gas to the state in which it exists in the carbohydrate. The light energy thus utilized is
2
trapped in the carbohydrate. If the light intensity is diminished, photosynthesis slows down and
hence the growth. If higher than optimal light intensities are provided, growth again slows down
because of the injury to the chloroplasts.
The light intensity is measured by the international unit known as Lux. It is direct
illumination on the surrounding surface that is one meter from a uniform point source of 1
international candle. Green house crops are subjected to light intensities varying from 129.6klux
on clear summer days to 3.2 Klux on cloudy winter days. For most crops, neither condition is
ideal. Many crops become light saturated, in other words, photosynthesis does not increase at
light intensities higher than 32.2klux. Rose and carnation plants will grow well under summer
light intensities. In general, for most other crops foliage is deeper green if the greenhouse is
shaded to the extent of about 40% from mid spring (May) to mid fall (August and September).
87
Thus, it is apparent that light intensity requirements of photosynthesis are vary considerably from
crop to crop.
Light is classified according to its wave length in nanometers (nm). Not all light useful in
photosynthesis process. UV light is available in the shorter wavelength range, i.e less than
400nm. Large of quantities of it is harmful to the plants. Glass screens are opaque to the most
UV light and light below the range of 325nm. Visible and white light has wavelength of 400 to
700nm.Far red light (700 to 750nm) affects plants, besides causing photosynthesis. Infrared rays
of longer wavelengths are not involved in the plant process. It is primarily, the visible spectrum
of light that is used in photosynthesis. In the blue and red bands, the photosynthesis activity is
higher, when the blue light (shorter wavelength) alone is supplied to plants, the growth is
retarded, and the plant becomes hard and dark in colour. When the plants are grown under red
light (longer wavelength), growth is soft and internodes are long, resulting in tall plants. Visible
light of all wavelengths is readily utilized in photosynthesis.
29.2 Temperature
Temperature is a measure of level of the heat present. All crops have temperature range
in which they can grow well. Below this range, the plant life process stop due to ice formation
within the tissue and cells are possibly punctured by ice crystals. At the upper extreme, enzymes
become inactive, and again process essential for life cease. Enzymes are biological reaction
catalyst and are heat sensitive. All biochemical reactions in the plant are controlled by the
enzymes. The rate of reactions controlled by the enzyme often double or triple for each rise of
temperature by 100C, until optimum temperature is reached. Further, increase in temperature
begins to suppress the reaction and finally stop it.
As a general rule, green house crops are grown at a day temperature, which are 3 to 60C
higher than the night temperature on cloudy days and 80C higher on clear days. The night
temperature of green house crops is generally in the range of 7 to 210C. Primula, mathiola incana
and calceolaria grow best at 70C, carnation and cineraria at 100C, rose at 160C, chrysanthemum
and poinsettia at 17 to 180C and African violet at 21 to 220C.
29.3 Relative humidity
As the green house is a closed space, the relative humidity of the green house air will be
more when compared to the ambient air, due to the moisture added by the evapo-transpiration
process. Some of this moisture is taken away by the air leaving from the green house due to
ventilation. Sensible heat inputs also lower the relative humidity of the air to some extent. In
order to maintain the desirable relative humidity levels in the green houses, processes like
humidification or dehumidification are carried out. For most crops, the acceptable range of
relative humidity is between 50 to 80%. However for plant propagation work, relative humidity
up to 90% may be desirable.
In summer, due to sensible heat addition in the daytime, and in winters for increasing the
night time temperatures of the green house air, more sensible heat is added causing a reduction in
88
the relative humidity of the air. For this purpose, evaporative cooling pads and fogging system of
humidification are employed. When the relative humidity is on the higher side, ventilators,
chemical dehumidifiers and cooling coils are used for de- humidification.
89
Lecture No. 30
Carbon dioxide Enrichment and Ventilation
30.1 Ventilation
A green house is ventilated for either reducing the temperature of the green house air or
for replenishing carbon dioxide supply or for moderating the relative humidity of the air. Air
temperatures above 350C are generally not suited for the crops in green house. It is quite possible
to bring the green house air temperature below this upper limit during spring and autumn seasons
simply by providing adequate ventilation to the green house. The ventilation in a green house can
either be natural or forced. In case of small green houses (less than 6m wide) natural ventilation
can be quite effective during spring and autumn seasons. However, fan ventilation is essential to
have precise control over the air temperature, humidity and carbon dioxide levels.
30.2 Carbon dioxide
Carbon is an essential plant nutrient and is present in the plant in greater quantity than
any other nutrient. About 40% of the dry matter of the plant is composed of carbon. Under
normal conditions, carbon dioxide (CO ) exits as a gas in the atmosphere slightly above 0.03%
2
or 345ppm. During the day, when photosynthesis occurs under natural light, the plants in a green
house draw down the level of CO to below 200ppm. Under these circumstances, infiltration or
2
ventilation increases carbon dioxide levels, when the outside air is brought in, to maintain the
ambient levels of CO . If the level of CO is less than ambient levels, CO may retard the plant
2 2 2
growth. In cold climates, maintaining ambient levels of CO by providing ventilation may be un-
2
economical, due to the necessity of heating the incoming air in order to maintain proper growing
temperatures. In such regions, enrichment of the green house with CO is followed. The exact
2
CO level needed for a given crop will vary, since it must be correlated with other variables in
2
greenhouse production such as light, temperature, nutrient levels, cultivar and degree of maturity.
Most crops will respond favorably to CO at 1000 to 1200 ppm.
2
30.3 Green house ventilation
Ventilation is the process of allowing the fresh air to enter in to the enclosed area by
driving out the air with undesirable properties. In the green house context, ventilation is essential
for reducing temperature, replenishing CO and controlling relative humidity. Ventilation
2
requirements for green houses vary greatly, depending on the crop grown and the season of
production. The ventilation system can be either a passive system (natural Ventilation) or an
active system (forced ventilation) using fans. Usually green houses that are used seasonally
employ natural ventilation only. The plant response to specific environment factor is related to
the physiological processes and hence the latter affects the yield and quality. Hence, controlling
of environment is of great importance to realize the complete benefit of CEA. Manual
maintenance of uniform environmental condition inside the green house is very difficult and
90
cumbersome. A poor maintenance results in less crop production, low quality and low income.
For effective control of automatic control systems like micro processor and computer are used
presently to maintain the environment.
30.4. Natural ventilation
In the tropics, the sides of greenhouse structures are often left open for natural
ventilation. Tropical greenhouse is primarily a rain shelter, a cover of polyethylene over the crop
to prevent rainfall from entering the growing area. This mitigates the problem of foliage diseases.
Ventilators were located on both roof slopes adjacent to the ridge and also on both side walls of
the greenhouse. The ventilators on the roof as well as those on the side wall accounts, each about
10% of the total roof area. During winter cooling phase, the south roof ventilator was opened in
stages to meet cooling needs. When greater cooling was required, the north ventilator was
opened in addition to the south ventilator. In summer cooling phase, the south ventilator was
opened first, followed by the north ventilator. As the incoming air moved across the greenhouse,
it was warmed by sunlight and by mixing with the warmer greenhouse air. With the increase in
temperature, the incoming air becomes lighter and rises up and flows out through the roof
ventilators. This sets up a chimney effect (Fig. 7), which in turn draws in more air from the side
ventilators creating a continuous cycle. This system did not adequately cool the greenhouse. On
hot days, the interior walls and floor were frequently injected with water to help cooling.
Fig.30.1.Chimney effect in general passive ventilation
30.4.1. Roll up side passive ventilation in poly houses
In roll up method of ventilation, allowing the air to flow across the plants. The amount of
ventilation on one side, or both sides, may be easily adjusted in response to temperature,
prevailing wind and rain (Fig.30.2). During the periods of excessive heat, it may be necessary to
roll the sides up almost to the top. Passive ventilation can also be accomplished by manually
raising or parting the polyethylene sheet. The open vent areas must be covered with screens to
91
prevent virus diseases. The holes must be large enough to permit free flow of air. Screens with
small holes blocks air movement and cause a build up of dust. Rollup side passive ventilation on
plastic greenhouses is only effective on free standing greenhouses and not on gutter connected
greenhouses.
Fig. 30.2 Roll up side passive ventilation and fan-and-pad cooling system
30.5 Forced Ventilation
In forced or active ventilation, mechanical devices such as fans are used to expel the air.
This type of ventilation can achieve uniform cooling. These include summer fan-and-pad and fog
cooling systems and the winter convection tube and horizontal airflow systems. For mechanical
ventilation, low pressure, medium volume propeller blade fans, both directly connected and belt
driven are used for greenhouse ventilation. They are placed at the end of the green house
opposite to the air intake, which is normally covered by gravity or motorized louvers. The fans
vents, or louvers, should be motorized, with their action controlled by fan operation. Motorized
louvers prevent the wind from opening the louvers, especially when heat is being supplied to the
green house. Wall vents should be placed continuously across the end of the greenhouse to avoid
hot areas in the crop zone. Evaporative cooling in combination with the fans is called as fan-and-
pad cooling system. The fans and pads are usually arranged on opposite walls of the greenhouse
(Fig.8). The common types of cooling pads are made of excelsior (wood fiber), aluminum fiber,
glass fiber, plastic fiber and cross-fluted cellulose material.
Evaporative cooling systems are especially efficient in low humidity environments. There
is growing interest in building greenhouses combining both passive (natural) and active (forced)
systems of ventilation. Passive ventilation is utilized as the first stage of cooling, and the fan-pad
evaporative cooling takes over when the passive system is not providing the needed cooling. At
this stage, the vents for natural ventilation are closed. When both options for cooling are
designed in greenhouse construction, initial costs of installation will be more. But the operational
costs are minimized in the long run, since natural ventilation will, most often meet the needed
ventilation requirements.
92
Fogging systems is an alternative to evaporative pad cooling. They depend on absolutely
clean water, Free of any soluble salts, in order to prevent plugging of the mist nozzles. Such
cooling systems are not as common as evaporative cooling pads, but when they become more
cost competitive, they will be adopted widely. Fogging systems are the second stage of cooling
when passive systems are inadequate.
93
Lecture No. 31
Computers use in Green Houses and Equipment required for controlling green house
environment – summer cooling and winter cooling systems
31.1 Computers
Now-a-days, computer control systems are common in greenhouse installation
throughout Europe, Japan and the United States. Computer systems can provide fully integrated
control of temperature, humidity, irrigation and fertilization, CO2, light and shade levels for
virtually any size growing facility. Precise control over a growing operation enables growers to
realize saving of 15 to 50% in energy, water, chemical and pesticide applications. Computer
controls normally help to achieve greater plant consistency, on-schedule production, higher
overall plant quality and environmental purity.
A computer can control hundreds of devices within a green house (vents, heaters, fans,
hot water mixing valves, irrigation valves, curtains and lights) by utilizing dozens of input
parameters, such as outside and inside temperatures, humidity, outside wind direction and
velocity, CO levels and even the time of the day or night. Computer systems receive signals
2
from all sensors, evaluate all conditions and send appropriate commands every minute to each
piece of equipment in the greenhouse range thus maintaining ideal conditions in each of the
various independent greenhouse zones defined by the grower. Computers collect and record data
provided by greenhouse production managers. Such a data acquisition system will enable the
grower to gain a comprehensive knowledge of all factors affecting the quality and timeliness of
the product. A computer produces graphs of past and current environmental conditions both
inside and outside the greenhouse complex. Using a data printout option, growers can produce
reports and summaries of environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity and the CO2
status for the given day, or over a longer period of time for current or later use.
As more environmental factor in the greenhouse is controlled, there comes a stage when
individual controls cannot be coordinated to prevent system overlap. An example is the
greenhouse thermostat calling for heating while the exhaust fans are still running. With proper
software program, which uses the environmental parameters as input from different sensors, can
effectively coordinate all the equipment without overlap and precisely control all parameters
affecting plant development as desired. Despite the attraction of the computer systems, it should
be remembered that the success of any production system is totally dependent on the grower‟s
knowledge of the system and the crop management. Computers can only assist by adding
precision to the overall greenhouse production practice, and they are only as effective as the
software it runs and the effectively of the operator. The advantages and disadvantages of
computerized control system are as follows:
Advantages
94
1. The computer always knows what all systems are doing and, if programmed properly,
can coordinate these systems without overlap to provide the optimum environment.
2. The computer can record the environmental data, which can be displayed to show current
conditions or stored and processed ones to provide a history of the cropping period, and if
desired it may also be displayed in table or graph form.
3. A high-speed computer with networking facility can control several remotely located
greenhouses, by placing the computer in a central area and the results can be monitored
frequently by the management.
4. With proper programming and sensing systems, the computer can anticipate weather
changes and make adjustments in heating and ventilation systems, thus saving the energy.
5. The computer can be programmed to sound an alarm if conditions become unacceptable
to and to detect sensor and equipment failure.
Disadvantages
1. High initial cost investment.
2. Requires qualified operators.
3. High maintenance, care and precautions are required.
4. Not economical for small scale and seasonal production.
31.2 Microprocessors
Dedicated microprocessors can be considered as simple computers. A typical
microprocessor will have a keypad and a two or three line liquid crystal display of, sometimes,
80-character length for programming. They generally do not have a floppy disk drive. They have
more output connections and can control up to 20 devices. With this number of devices, it is
cheaper to use a microprocessor. They can receive signals of several types, such as, temperature,
light intensity, rain and wind speed. They permit integration of the diverse range of devices,
which is not possible with thermostats. The accuracy of the microprocessor for temperature
control is quite good. Unlike a thermostat, which is limited to a bimetallic strip or metallic tube
for temperature sensing and its mechanical displacement for activation, the microprocessor often
uses a thermistor. The bimetallic strip sensor has less reproducibility and a greater range between
the ON and OFF steps. Microprocessors can be made to operate various devices, for instance, a
microprocessor can operate the ventilators based on the information from the sensor for the wind
direction and speed. Similarly a rain sensor can also activate the ventilators to prevent the
moisture sensitive crop from getting wet. A microprocessor can be set to activate the CO
2
generator when the light intensity exceeds a given set point, a minimum level for photosynthesis.
Precise control of various parameters of green house environment is necessary to
optimize energy inputs and thereby maximize the economic returns. Basically, the objective of
environmental control is to maximize the plant growth. The control of green house environment
means the control of temperature, light, air composition and nature of the root medium. A green
house is essentially meant to permit at least partial control of microclimate within it. Obviously
green houses with partial environmental control are more common and economical. From the
95
origin of greenhouse to the present there has been a steady evolution of controls. Five stages in
this evolution include manual controls, thermostats, step-controllers, dedicated micro processors
and computers. This chain of evolution has brought about a reduction in control labour and an
improvement in the conformity of green house environments to their set points. The benefits
achieved from green house environmental uniformity are better timing and good quality of crops,
disease control and conservation of energy.
31.3 Active summer cooling systems
Active summer cooling is achieved by evaporative cooling process .The evaporative
cooling systems developed are to reduce the problem of excess heat in green house. In this
process cooling takes place when the heat required for moisture evaporation is derived from the
surrounding environment causing a depression in its temperature. The two active summer
cooling systems in use presently are fan-and pad and fog systems. In the evaporative cooling
process the cooling is possible only up to the wet bulb temperature of the incoming air.
31.3.1 Fan-and Pad cooling system
The fan and pad evaporative cooling system has been available since 1954 and is still the
most common summer cooling system in green houses (Fig.5). Along one wall of the green
house, water is passed through a pad that is usually placed vertically in the wall. Traditionally,
the pad was composed of excelsior (wood shreds), but today it is commonly made of a cross-
flutedcellulose material some what similar in appearance to corrugated card board. Exhaust
fans are placed on the opposite wall. Warm outside air is drawn in through the pad. The supplied
water in the pad, through the process of evaporation, absorbs heat from the air passing through
the pad as well as from surroundings of the pad and frame, thus causing the cooling effect. Khus-
khus grass mats can also be used as cooling pads.
31.3.2 Fog cooling system
The fog evaporative cooling system, introduced in green houses in 1980, operates on the
same cooling principle as the fan and pad cooling system but uses quite different arrangement
(Fig.5). A high pressure pumping apparatus generates fog containing water droplets with a mean
size of less than 10 microns using suitable nozzles. These droplets are sufficiently small to stay
suspended in air while they are evaporating. Fog is dispersed throughout the green house,
cooling the air everywhere. As this system does not wet the foliage, there is less scope for
disease and pest attack. The plants stay dry throughout the process. This system is equally useful
for seed germination and propagation since it eliminates the need for a mist system.
Both types of summer evaporative cooling system can reduce the greenhouse air
temperature. The fan-and pad system can lower the temperature of incoming air by about 80% of
the difference between the dry and wet bulb temperatures while the fog cooling system can lower
the temperature by nearly 100% difference. This is, due to the fact that complete evaporation of
the water is not taking place because of bigger droplet size in fad and pad, whereas in the fog
96
cooling system, there will be complete evaporation because of the minute size of the water
droplets. Thus lesser the dryness of the air, greater evaporative cooling is possible.
31.4 Active winter cooling systems
Excess heat can be a problem during the winter. In the winter, the ambient temperature
will be below the desired temperature inside the green house. Owing to the green house effect
the entrapment of solar heat can rise the temperature to an injurious level if the green house is
not ventilated. The actual process in winter cooling is tempering the excessively cold ambient air
before it reaches the plant zone. Otherwise, hot and cold spots in the green house will lead to
uneven crop timing and quality .This mixing of low temperature ambient air with the warm
inside air cools the green house in the winter. Two active winter cooling systems commonly
employed are convection tube cooling and horizontal air flow (HAF) fan cooling systems.
97
Fig. 31.1. Components of fan-and-pad and fog cooling systems in a greenhouse
31.4.1 Convection tube cooling
The general components of convection tube are the louvered air inlet, a polyethylene
convection tube with air distribution holes, a pressurizing fan to direct air in to the tube under
98
pressure, and an exhaust fan to create vacuum. When the air temperature inside the green house
exceeds the set point, the exhaust fan starts functioning thus creating vacuum inside the green
house. The louver of the inlet in the gable is then opened through which cold air enters due to the
vacuum. The pressurizing fan at the end of the clear polyethylene convection tube, operates to
pick up the cool air entering the louver. A proper gap is available for the air entry, as the end of
the convection tube is separated from the louvered inlet by 0.3 to 0.6m and the other end of the
tube is sealed. Round holes of 5 to 8 cm in diameter are provided in pairs at opposite sides of the
tube spaced at 0.5 to 1m along the length of the tube.
Cold air under pressure in the convection tube shoots out of holes on either side of the
tube in turbulent jets. In this system, the cold air mixes with the warm greenhouse air well above
the plant height. The cool mixed air, being heavier gently flows down to the floor level, effects
the complete cooling of the plant area. The pressurizing fan forcing the incoming cold air in to
the convection tube must be capable of moving at least the same volume of air as that of the
exhaust fan, thereby avoiding the development of cold spots in the house. When cooling is not
required, the inlet louver closes and the pressurizing fan continues to circulate the air within the
greenhouse. The process minimizes the temperature gradient at difference levels. The circulation
of air using convection tube consumes more power than a circulation system.
31.4.2 Horizontal air flow cooling
HAF cooling system uses small horizontal fans for moving the air mass and is considered
to be an alternative to convection tube for the air distribution. In this method the green house
may be visualized as a large box containing air and the fans located strategically moves the air in
a circular pattern. This system should move air at 0.6 to 0.9 m3/min/m2 of the green house floor
area. Fractional horse power of fans is 31 to 62 W (1/30 to 1/15hp) with a blade diameter of
41cm are sufficient for operation. The fans should be arranged in such a way that air flows are
directed along the length of the greenhouse and parallel to the ground. The fans are placed at 0.6
to 0.9m above plant height and at intervals of 15m.They are arranged such that the air flow is
directed by one row of the fans along the length of the greenhouse down one side to the opposite
end and then back along the other side by another row of fans (Fig. 31.2). Greenhouses of larger
widths may require more number of rows of fans along its length.
Temperatures at plant height are more uniform with HAF system than with convection
tube system. The HAF system makes use of the same exhaust fans, inlet louvers and controls as
the convection tube system. The only difference is the use of HAF fans in the place of
convection tubes for the air distribution. Cold air entering through the louvers located at the
higher level in the gables of the green house is drawn by the air circulation created by the net
work of HAF fans and to complete the cycle, proper quantity of air is let out through the exhaust
fans. The combined action of louvered inlet, HAF fans and the exhaust fans distribute the cold
air throughout the greenhouse.
Similarly to the convection tubes, the HAF fans can be used to distribute heat in the
green house When neither cooling nor heating is required, the HAF fans or convection tube can
99
be used to bring warm air down from the upper level of the gable and to provide uniform
temperature in the plant zone. It is possible to integrate summer and winter cooling systems with
heating arrangements inside a green house for the complete temperature control requirements for
certain days of the season.
Fig. 31.2 HAF system in different sizes of greenhouses
The northern parts of our country experience cold winters, where heating system need to
be employed in the greenhouses along with cooling systems for summer. Whereas the southern
region greenhouses need only cooling systems since the winter cold effect is not that severe.
Greenhouse heating is required in cold weather conditions, if the entrapped heat is not sufficient
during the nights. The heat is always lost from the greenhouse when the surroundings are
relatively cooler. Heat must be supplied to a greenhouse at the same rate with which it is lost in
order to maintain a desired temperature: Heat losses can occur in three different modes of heat
transfer, namely conduction, convection, and radiation. Maintenance of desired higher
temperature, compared with the surroundings needs heating systems and heat distribution
systems. For the purpose of greenhouse heating, apart from conventional systems, solar energy
can also be used and the heat can be stored using water and rock storage. Different heat
conservation practices are available to effectively utilize the heat energy.
31.5 Modes of heat loss
The heating systems, in a continuous process, should supply the heat just enough to
compensate which is lost. Most heat is lost by conduction through the covering materials of the
greenhouse. Different materials, such as aluminum sash bars, glass polyethylene, and cement
partition walls, vary in conduction according to the rate at which each conducts heat from the
warm interior to the colder exterior. A good conductor of heat looses more heat in a shorter time
100
than a bad conductor and vice versa. There are only limited ways of insulating the covering
material without blocking the light transmission. A dead air space between two coverings
appears to be the best system. A saving of 40% of the heat requirement can be achieved when a
second covering in applied. For example greenhouse covered with one layer of polyethylene
loses, 6.8 W of heat through each square meter of covering every hour when the outside
temperature is 1oC lower than the inside. When second layer of polyethylene is added, only 3.97
W/m2 is lost (40% reduction).
A second mode of heat loss is that of convection (air infiltration). Spaces between panes
of glass or FRP and ventilators and doors permit the passage of warm air outward and cold air
inward. A general assumption holds that the volume of air held in a greenhouse can be lost as
often as once very 60 minutes in a double layer film plastic or polycarbonate panel greenhouse,
every 40 minutes in a FROP or a new glass greenhouse every 30 minutes in an old well
maintained glass greenhouse, and every 15 minutes in an old poorly maintained glass
greenhouse. About 10% of total heat loss from a structurally tight glass greenhouse occurs
through infiltration loss.
A third mode of heat loss from a greenhouse is that of radiation. Warm objects emit radiant
energy, which passes through air to colder objects without warming the air significantly. The
colder objects become warmer. Glass, vinyl plastic, FRP, and water are relatively opaque to
radiant energy, whereas polyethylene is not. Polyethylene, greenhouses can lose considerable
amounts of heat through radiation to colder objects outside, unless a film of moisture forms on
the polyethylene to provide a barrier.
31.5.1. Heating systems The heating system must provide heat to the greenhouse at the same
rate at which it is lost by co0nductin, infiltration, and radiation. There are three popular types of
heating systems for greenhouses. The most common and least expensive is the unit heater
system. In this system, warm air is blown from unit heaters that have self contained fireboxes.
These heaters consist of three functional parts. Fuel is combusted in a firebox to provide heat.
The heat is initially contained in the exhaust, which rises through the inside of a set of thin
walled metal tubes on it way to the exhaust stack. The warm exhaust transfers heat to the cooler
metal walls of the tubes. Much of the heat is removed from the exhaust by the time it reaches the
stack through which it leaves the greenhouse. A fan in the back of the unit heater draws in
greenhouse air, passing it over the exterior side of the tubes and then out from the heater to the
greenhouse environment again. The cool air passing over hot metal tubes is warmed and the air
is circulated. A second type of system is central heating system, which consists of a central boiler
than produces steam or hot water, plus a radiating mechanism in the greenhouse to dissipate the
heat. A central heating system can be more efficient than unit heaters, especially in large
greenhouse ranges. In this system, two or more large boilers are in a single location. Heat is
transported in the form of hot water or steam through pipe mains to be growing area, and several
arrangements of heating pipes in greenhouse is possible (Fig. 31.3). The heat is exchanged from
the hot water in a pipe coil located across the greenhouse or an in-bed pipe coil located in the
101
plant zone. Some greenhouses have a third pipe coil embedded in a concrete floor. A set of unit
heaters can be used in the place of the overhead pipe coil, obtaining heat from hot water or steam
from the central boiler. The third type of system is radiation heating system. In this system, gas is
burned within pipes suspended overhead in the greenhouse. The warm pipes supply heat to the
plants. Low intensity infrared radiant heaters can save 30% or more, of fuel compared to
conventional heaters. Several of these heaters are installed in tandem in the greenhouse. Lower
air temperatures are possible since only the plants and root substrate are heated directly by this
mode of heating. The fourth possible type of system is the solar heating system, but it is still too
expensive to be a viable option. Solar heating systems are found in hobby greenhouses and small
commercial firms. Both water and rock energy storage systems are used in combination with
solar energy. The high cost of solar heating systems discourages any significant use by the
greenhouse industries.
31.5.2 Heat distribution systems
Heat is distributed from the unit heaters by one of two common methods. In the convection tube
method, warm air from unit heaters are distributed through a transparent polyethylene tube
running through the length of the greenhouse. Heat escapes from the tube through holes on either
side of the tube in small jet streams, which rapidly mix with the surrounding air and set up a
circulation pattern to minimize temperature gradients. The second method of heat distribution is
horizontal airflow. In this system, the greenhouse may be visualized as a large box containing
air, and it uses small horizontal fans for moving the air mass. The fans are located above plant
height and are spaced about 15 m (50 ft) apart in two rows. Their arrangement is tha, the heat
originating at one corner of the greenhouse is directed from one side of the greenhouse to the
opposite end and then back along the other side of the greenhouse. Proper arrangement of fans is
necessary for effective distribution in horizontal airflow system for various greenhouse sizes.
Both of these distribution systems can also be used for general circulation of air and for
introducing cold outside air during winter cooling.
31.5.3. Solar heating system Solar heating is often used as a partial or total alternative to fossil
fuel heating systems. Few solar heating systems exist in greenhouses today. The general
components of solar heating system (Fig. 31.3) are collector, heat storage facility, exchange to
transfer the solar derived heat to the greenhouse air, backup heater to take over when solar
heating does not suffice and set of controls. Various solar heat collectors are in existence, but the
flat plate collector has received greatest attention. This consists of a flat black plate (rigid plastic,
film plastic, sheet metal, or board) for absorbing solar energy. The plate is covered on the sun
side by two or more transparent glass or plastic layers and on the backside by insulation. The
enclosing layers serve to hold the collected heat within the collector. Water or air is passed
through the copper tubes placed over the black plate and absorb the entrapped heat and carry it to
the storage facility. A greenhouse itself can be considered as a solar collector. Some of its
collected heat is stored in the soil, plants, greenhouse frame, floor, and so on. The remaining heat
is excessive for plant growth and is therefore vented to the outside. The excess vented heat could
102
just as well be directed to a rock bed for storage and subsequent use during a period of heating.
Collection of heat by flat-plate collection is most efficient when the collector is positioned
perpendicular to the sun at solar noon. Based on the locations, the heat derived can provide 20 to
50% of the heat requirement.
31.6. Water and rock storage
Water and rocks are the two most common materials for the storage of heat in the greenhouse.
One kg of water can hold 4.23 kJ of heat for each 1oC rise in temperature. Rocks can store about
0.83 kJ for each 1oC. To store equivalent amounts of heat, a rock bed would have to be three
times as large as a water tank. A water storage system is well adapted to a water collector and a
greenhouse heating system which consists of a pipe coil or a unit heater which contains a water
coil. Heated water from the collector is pumped to the storage tank during the day. As and when
heat is required, warm water is pumped form the storage tank to a hot water or steam boiler or
into the hot water coil within a unit heater. Although the solar heated water will be cooler than
the thermostat setting on the boiler, heat can be saved, since the temperature of this water need
be raised as high as to reach the output temperature of water or steam from the boiler. A
temperature rise of 17oC above the ambient condition is expected during the daytime in solar
storage units. Each kilogram of water can supply 71.1 kJ of heat, and each kilogram of rock can
supply14.2 kJ of heat, as it cools by 17oC.
A rock storage bed can be used with an air-collector and forced air heating system. In this
case, heated air form the collector, along with air excessively heated inside the greenhouse
during the day, is forced through a bed of rocks (Fig. 31.3). The rocks absorb much of the heat.
The rock bed may be located beneath the floor of the greenhouse or outside the greenhouse, and
it should be well insulated against heat loss. During the night, when heat is required in the
greenhouse, cool air from inside the greenhouse is forced through the rocks, where it is warmed
and the passed back into the greenhouse. A clear polyethylene tube with holes along either side
serves well to distribute the warm air uniformly along the length of the greenhouse.
Conventional convection tubes can be used for distributing solar heated air. The water or rock
storage unit occupies a large amount of space and a considerable amount of insulation is
provided if the unit is placed outside. Placing it inside the greenhouse offers an advantage in that
escaping heat is beneficial during heating periods, but it is detrimental when heating is not
required. Rock beds can pose a problem in that they must remain relatively dry. Water
evaporating from these beds will remove considerable heat.
103
Fig. 31.3 Solar heating system for greenhouse and cross section of a typical rock storage unit
104
Lecture No. 32
Materials utilized for Green house construction
32.1 Greenhouse type based on construction
The type of construction is predominantly influenced by the structural material, though
the covering material also influences the type. Span of the house inurn dictates the selection of
structural members and their construction. Higher the span, stronger should be the material and
more structural members are used to make sturdy truss type frames. For smaller spans, simpler
designs like hoops can be followed. Therefore based on construction, greenhouses can be
broadly classified as wooden framed, pipe framed and truss framed structures.
32.1.1 Wooden framed structures In general, for the greenhouses with span less than 6 m, only
wooden framed structures are used. Side posts and columns are constructed of wood without the
use of a truss. Pine wood is commonly used as it is inexpensive and possesses the required
strength. Timber locally available, with good strength, durability and machinability also can be
used for the construction.
32.1.2 Pipe framed structures
Pipes are used for construction of greenhouses, when the clear span is around 12m (Fig.
32.1). In general, the side posts, columns, cross ties and purlins are constructed using pipes. In
this type, the trusses are not used.
32.1.3 Truss framed structures
If the greenhouse span is greater than or equal to 15m, truss frames are used. Flat steel,
tubular steel or angular iron is welded together to form a truss encompassing rafters, chords and
struts (Fig. 32.1). Struts are support members under compression and chords are support
members under tension. Angle iron purlins running throughout the length of greenhouse are
bolted to each truss. Columns are used only in very wide truss frame houses of 21.3 m or more.
Most of the glass houses are of truss frame type, as these frames are best suited for pre-
fabrication.
105
Fig 32.1. Pipe framed and Truss framed green house structures
32.2 Greenhouse type based on covering materials
Covering materials are the major and important component of the greenhouse structure.
Covering materials have direct influence on the greenhouse effect inside the structure and they
alter the air temperature inside the house. The types of frames and method of fixing also varies
with the covering material. Based on the type of covering materials, the greenhouses are
classified as glass, plastic film and rigid panel greenhouses.
32.2.1 Glass greenhouses
Only glass greenhouses with glass as the covering material existed prior to 1950. Glass as
covering material has the advantage of greater interior light intensity. These greenhouses have
higher air infiltration rate which leads to lower interior humidity and better disease prevention.
Lean-to type, even span, ridge and furrow type of designs are used for construction of glass
greenhouse.
32.2.2 Plastic film greenhouses
Flexible plastic films including polyethylene, polyester and polyvinyl chloride are used as
covering material in this type of greenhouses. Plastics as covering material for greenhouses have
become popular, as they are cheap and the cost of heating is less when compared to glass
106
greenhouses. The main disadvantage with plastic films is its short life. For example, the best
quality ultraviolet (UV) stabilized film can last for four years only. Quonset design as well as
gutter-connected design is suitable for using this covering material.
32.2.3 Rigid panel greenhouses
Polyvinyl chloride rigid panels, fibre glass-reinforced plastic, acrylic and polycarbonate
rigid panels are employed as the covering material in the quonset type frames or ridge and
furrow type frame. This material is more resistant to breakage and the light intensity is uniform
throughout the greenhouse when compared to glass or plastic. High grade panels have long life
even up to 20 years. The main disadvantage is that these panels tend to collect dust as well as to
harbor algae, which results in darkening of the panels and subsequent reduction in the light
transmission. There is significant danger of fire hazard.
32.3 Shading nets
There are a great number of types and varieties of plants that grow naturally in the most
diverse climate conditions that have been transferred by modern agriculture from their natural
habitats to controlled crop conditions. Therefore, conditions similar to the natural ones must be
created for each type and variety of plant. Each type of cultivated plant must be given the
specific type of shade required for the diverse phases of its development. The shading nets fulfill
the task of giving appropriate micro-climate conditions to the plants.
Shade nettings are designed to protect the crops and plants from UV radiation, but they
also provide protection from climate conditions, such as temperature variation, intensive rain and
winds. Better growth conditions can be achieved for the crop due to the controlled micro-climate
conditions “created” in the covered area, with shade netting, which results in higher crop yields.
All nettings are UV stabilized to fulfill expected lifetime at the area of exposure. They are
characterized of high tear resistance, low weight for easy and quick installation with a 30-90%
shade value range. A wide range of shading nets are available in the market which are defined on
the basis of the percentage of shade they deliver to the plant growing under them.
32.4. Design criteria of construction For locating the greenhouse, a piece of land larger than the
grower‟s immediate need should be acquired. The ultimate size of the greenhouse range should
be estimated. Area should then be added to this estimated figure to accommodate service
buildings, storage, access drives and a parking lot. The floor area of service buildings required
for small firms is about 13% of the greenhouse floor area, and it decreases with the increase in
size of the firm. On an average, service buildings occupy 10% of the growing area. The service
building is centrally located in a nearly square design of the firm, which minimizes distance of
movement of plants and materials. Doors between the service buildings and the greenhouse
should be wide enough to facilitate full use of the corridor width. Doors at least 3.1 m wide and
2.7 m high are common. It is good to have the greenhouse gutter at least 3.7 m above the floor to
accommodate automation and thermal blanket and still leave the room for future innovations.
107
32.5. Construction of glass greenhouses Glass greenhouses have an advantage of greater
interior light intensity over plastic panel and film plastic covered greenhouses. Glass
greenhouses tend to have a higher air infiltration rate, which leads to lower interior humidity,
which is advantageous for disease prevention. On the other hand, glass greenhouses have a
higher initial cost than double-layer film plastic greenhouses. While comparing the price of a
glass greenhouse to a film plastic greenhouse, one needs to take into account the initial purchase
price of each as well as the cost of re-covering the film plastic greenhouse every three to four
years.
Several types of glass greenhouses are designed to meet specific needs. A lean-to-type
design is used when a greenhouse is placed against the side of an existing building. This design
makes the best use of sunlight and minimizes the requirements for roof supports. It is found
mostly in the retail industry. An even-span greenhouse is one in which the two roof slopes are of
equal pitch and width. By comparison, a un-even-span greenhouse has roofs of unequal width,
which makes the structure adaptable to the side of a hill. This style is seldom used today because
such greenhouses are not adaptable to automation. Finally, a ridge-and-furrow design uses, two
or more A- frame greenhouses connected to one another along the length of the eave. The
sidewall is eliminated between greenhouses, which results in a structure with a single large
interior. Basically, three frame types are used in glass greenhouses, which are wood frames ( 6.1
m in width), pipe frames ( 12.2 m in width) and truss frames (15.2 m in width). Latest glass
greenhouses are primarily of the truss frame type. Truss frame greenhouses are best suited for
prefabrication. All-metal greenhouses proved cheaper to maintain since they required no
painting. At present, virtually all glass greenhouse construction is of the metal type. The
structural members of the glass greenhouse cast shadows that reduce plant growth during the
dark months of the year. Aluminum sash bars are stronger than wooden ones; hence wider panels
of glass can be used with aluminum bars. The reduction in materials and the reflectance of
aluminum have given these metal greenhouses a great advantage over wooden greenhouses in
terms of higher interior light intensity.
Glass greenhouse construction of today can be categorized as high profile or low profile.
The low profile greenhouse is most popular in the Netherlands and is known as the Venlo
greenhouse. The low profile greenhouses uses single panels of glass extend from eave to ridge.
The low profile greenhouse slightly reduces exposed surface area, thereby reducing the heating
cost, but more expensive to cool. The high profile greenhouses require more than single panel to
cover the eave to ridge. A problem with this design is the unsealed junction between pieces of
glass in the inner layer. Moisture and dust may enter between the layers and reduce light
transmission.
32.6 Construction of pipe framed greenhouses The choice of construction of pipe
framed greenhouses often favours low initial investment and relatively long life. Galvanized mild
steel pipe as a structural member in association with wide width UV- stabilized low density
polyethylene (LDPE) film is a common option of greenhouse designers.
108
Material requirement
The structural members of greenhouse are
(a) hoops
(b) foundation
(c) lateral supports
(d) polygrip assembly
(e) end frame
109
