LECTURE NOTES
PRINCIPLES OF PLANT PATHOLOGY,DISEASES OF
CROPS AND THEIR MANAGEMENT
DA171
M.ANURADHA
AGRICULTURAL POLYTECHNIC,PALEM
PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
Lecture out lines
1. Introduction to plant pathology, objectives
2. Plant disease causing organisms – Fungi, bacteria
3. Virus, nematodes, phanerogamic parasites
4. Terms used in plant pathology
5. Classification of plant diseases – caused by Fungi, Bacteria, virus
6. Survival o pathogens in plants- infected host, saprophytic survival, dormant spores
7. Dispersal of plant pathogens – Active, passive
8. Infection process- pre penetration, penetration& post penetration process
9. Principles of plant disease management- Avoidance, Exclusion, Eradication&
Protection
10. Classification of fungicides
11. Host plant resistance
12. Study of symtomatology- smuts, powdery mildews, Rusts, Rots, Leafblights
13. Management methods for important diseases- wilts, canker, mosaic, Anthracnose
14. Symptoms of nematodes and plant parasites attack, nutrient deficiencies
15. Integrated plant disease management
16. Paddy- Blast, Brown spot, sheath blight
17. Paddy- Bacteria leaf blight, Tungro
18. Jowar- Rust, downy mildew, smut, leaf blight, Ergot, Anthracnose
19. Maize- Leaf blight, stemrot, sheath blight
20. Bajra, downy mildew, rust, ergot . Ragi- blast,
21. Sugarcane- Red rot, smut, mycoplasma
22. Groundnut- Tikka spot, Rust, budnecrosis
23. Castor- Wilt, Botrytis
24. Gingelly- Powdery mildew, cercospora spot, Atternaria spot, Bacteria leaf blight,
Root& stemrot, phyllody
25. Sunflower- Rust, Alternaria spot, downy mildew, stemrot
26. Redgram- wilt, sterility mosaic, bacteria leaf spot
27. Green gram& Black gram- Root rot, powdery mildew, Rust, cercospora spot,
corynospora spot, yellow mosaic, Bactria leaf spot
28. Bengal gram- wilt, Ascocyta blight
29. Citrus- Gummosis, wilt
30. Citrus- Tristeza, Mosaic, Bud union creze
31. Citrus- Nutrient deficiencies symptoms
32. Mango- Powdery mildew. Grape- Powdery mildew
33. Guava- canker, wilt
34. Papaya- Powdermildew, Mosaic, Leafcurl, Stem rot
35. Banana- Anthracnose, Sigatoka leaf spot
36. Banana- Bacterial wilt, mosaic
37. Pomegranate- Cercospora spot, Anthracnose
38. Pomegranate- Bacteria leaf spot, powdery mildew
39. Chilli- seedling rot, Dieback, Fruit rot
40. Chilli- Powdery mildew, Alternaria blight, Bacteria leaf spot
41. Bhendi- Powdery mildew,Yellow vein mosaic
42. Cucurbits- Powdery mildew, Alternaria spot, Black rot
43. Tomato- Phytophthora blight, Alternaria blight, Fusarium wilt, Bacteria wilt
44. Tomato- Root knots, Mosaic, leaf curl
45. Coconut- Budrot, Ganoderma root rot, stem bleeding
46. Rose- Powdery mildew, Dieback, black spot
47. Turmeric- Leaf spot, rhizome rot
48. Ginger- Phyllocystca leaf spot, Rhizome rot
Plant Pathology/Phytopathology(Phyton= plant,Pathos=suffering,ailment,Logos=study ) ie., the
study of nature, development andmanagement of plant diseases.
Definition: A branch of Agricultural science which deals withcause,etiology,resulting lossesand
management of plant diseases.
Objectives of Plant Pathology:
Study of biotic and abiotic causes of disease
Factors helping in disease development
Study of Host-pathogen interaction
Management of diseases and reduction of plant loss
Important Phytopathogenic organisms :
1.Fungi: Fungi are eukaryotic, spore bearing, achlorophyllous heterotrophic organisms
thatgenerally reproduce sexually and asexually and whose filamentous, branchedsomatic structures
are typically surrounded by cell walls consisting chitin orcellulose or both with many organic
molecules and exhibitingabsorptive nutrition.
2.Bacteria: Bacteria are extremely minute, prokaryotic microorganisms,rigid, essentially
unicellular organismslackingchlorophyll and generally devoid of any photosynthetic pigment,
characterised by rapid reproduction(mostly asexually). Bacteria are ubiquitous and physiologically
diverse and they occupy a wide range of ecological niches.
Bacterial diseases of plants occur worldwide. As they favour moist or warm conditions,
bacteria are of most importance in tropical, subtropical and warm-temperate areas.Most bacteria
can survive on crop residues, in soil, on seeds or on living plants. Bacteria infect plants through
wounds or natural openings (eg stomata and lenticels). Infected seeds, infected propagating
material, water splash, insects and machinery can all spread bacteria.
3.Phytoplasma:
Phytoplasmas, previously known as Mycoplasma-like organisms, are prokaryotes in the
class Mollicutes. They are similar to bacteria, but lack a rigid cell wall and cannot live freely in the
environment. They have not been grown in culture. Phytoplasmas are found in the sieve tube cells
of plant phloem tissue and most are transmitted by phloem-feeding leafhoppers and plant hoppers.
Phytoplasmas are obligate parasites and complete their life cycle within host tissues. They cause
disease in a wide range of plant hosts. Symptoms commonly caused by phytoplasmas are leaf
discolouration, stunting, dieback, reduced leaf size (‘little leaf’), witches’ broom, phyllody,
virescence.
4.Virus: A sub-microscopic, obligate parasite consisting of nucleic acid andprotein that multiplies
only intracellularly and is potentially pathogenic.Virusesarecomprised of a protein coat or shell
called a capsid, surrounding a genome of ribonucleic acid (RNA) or DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid).
Viruses can only multiply in living cells in infected plant. The energy resources of the plant are
thereby redirected to reproduce viruses. Viral infection impairs the plant’s normal functions, such
as photosynthesis and growth.
5.Nematodes:
Nematodes are eel shaped organisms without legs or other appendages. Plant
Pathogenic nematodes obtain their food from living plants using spears or stylets thereby
causing diseases in plants.Some nematodes can survive as cysts or eggs in absence of host
plants.
Crops such as banana, citrus, coffee, cotton, fruits, peanut, pineapple, potato, rice, soybean,
tobacco and vegetables are affected. Some nematodes have a very broad host range, while
others have very narrow ones.All parasitic nematodes belong to the Phylum Nematoda and
belong to orders Tylenchida and Dorylaimida.General symptoms include Stunting, yellowing
of leaves,root knot galls, necrosis, swelling of stem, curled leaves and splitting of bulbs, rotting
and ultimately poor growth and yield.Eg. Meloidogyne, Heterodera
6.Phanerogamic plant parasites:
A parasitic plant is a plant that derives some or all of its nutritional requirements from
another living plant by establishing connections (Haustoria) with host plant vascular elements.
Phanerogamic plant parasites are characterized by their varied dependence on host for
water, nutrients, minerals; production of flowers and seeds; presence and absence of
chloroplasts.Ex.Stem-Cuscuta, Loranthus, Root-Orabanche, Striga.
Classification of diseases Based on
1.Type of crop: Field crops, Horticultural crops etc
2.Plant part affected: Leaves, Fruits etc
3.Causal organism: Fungi, Bacteria, Virus
4.Source of pathogen: Soil borne, wind borne, Seed borne
5.Host reaction:warts, Galls, Necrosis
6.Severity of disease occurrence:Epidemic, endemic, sporadic
7.Symptoms of disease:Root rot, wilt, Smut, Powdery mildew, Damping off etc
8.Disease causal organism: Infectious and non-infectious
TERMS AND CONCEPTS USED IN PLANT PATHOLOGY
Disease: Any malfunctioning of host cells and tissues that result from continuousirritation by
a pathogenic agent or environmental factor and leads to development ofsymptoms
Disorder: Non-infectious plant diseases due to abiotic causes such as adverse soil
andenvironmental conditions are termed disorders. occur in the absence ofpathogens, and
cannot, therefore, be transmitted from diseased to healthy plants.
Pathogen: An entity, usually a micro-organism that can incite disease. Pathogen is any agent
that causes pathos (ailment, suffering) or damage. However, theterm is generally used to
denote living organisms (Fungi, bacteria, MLO’s, nematodesetc.,) and viruses but not
nutritional deficiencies.
Sign: The pathogen or its parts or products seen on a host plant.
Symptom: The external or internal reactions or alterations of a plant as a result of adisease.
Inoculum: It is the part of the pathogen which on contact with susceptible host plant
causes infection (or) the infective propagules which on coming in contact with the host
plant causes an infection are known as inoculum
Epidemic disease: A disease usually occurs widely but periodically in a
destructive form.Ex: Late blight of potato – Irish famine (1845)
Endemic: Constantly present in a moderate to severe form and is confined to a particular
country or district.
Ex: Club root of cabbage in Nilgiris, Black wart of potato, Onion smut
Sporadic disease: Occur at very irregular intervals and locations and in relatively fewer
instances. Ex: Udbatta disease of rice, Angular leaf spot of cucumber
SYMPTOMS OF FUNGAL DISEASES
Downy mildews : Under low temperature &humid conditions, owing to the production
of sporangiophores and sporangia, a white or grey bloom develops on the lesions
produced usually on the under surface of leaves. This is called the “downy growth”.
Pernospora and Plasmopara cause downy mildews.Ex : Downy mildew of grapevine&
cucurbits.
Powdery mildews : Enormous numbers of conidia are formed on superficial growth of
the fungus giving the host surface a dusty or powdery appearance. Black minute fruiting
bodies may also be seen.Erysiphe family pathogens cause this
Eg : Powdery mildew of cucurbits, grapevine, chillies
Rusts : The rusts appear as relatively small pustules of spores and red, brown, yellow or
black in colour.
Smuts : Smut affected parts of the plant show a black or purplish black dusty
massusually appear on floral organs.
Eg : Loose smut of wheat – Ustilago tritici
Hypertrophy : Hyperplasia is the abnormal increase in the size of a plant part due to
increase in number of cells. In hypertrophy the increased size is due to increase in the
size of cells of a particular tissue.The over growths are of various forms in different
diseases
a. Galls : These are malformations of more or less globose, elongate or irregular shape.
They may be fleshy or woody.
Eg : Club root of cabbage,Stem gall of coriander
b. Warts : Smaller galls are called warts Eg : Black wart of potato
c. Leaf Curl : Leaves are twisted, curled and distorted due to growth in tissues in
localized are of the leaf.
d. Transormation of plant parts : The earheads are converted into green leaf like
structures.
Eg : Green ear of pearl millet, Green ear of Korra
Hypoplasia or dwarfing : inhibition of growth resulting in stunting or dwarfing of
whole plant or only certain parts.
Leaf Spots: The shape of lesions on leaves and fruits may be round, angular or irregular.
The dead areas are often surrounded by a purple, red, yellow or brown margin.
Anthracnose : circular to angular, sometimes irregularspots occurring along the leaf
veins, petioles, stems and fruits. The affected tissues are discoloured and killed resulting
in characteristic lesions.Eg : Anthracnose of grapevine ,Anthracnose of mango
Blight and blast : In a diseased plant, due to severity of infection the tissues are rapidly
killed, resulting in death of foliage, blossom or other above ground plant parts. Such a
symptom is known as blight. When the entire leaf blade, bud or other plant parts are
involved resulting in quick death of the part of plant as a whole then it is known as blast.
Eg : Early blight of potato and tomato,
Cankers :. Corky growths often develop in the affected parts. Cankers mostly cause
localized death of the cortical tissues of stem, fruits or leaves .Infection may be deep
seated.
Scab : The infection is not deep seated. Sunken lesions are produced.
Damping-off : It is a condition in which the stem is attacked near the soil surface.The
affected portion becomes constricted and weak, incapable of bearing the load of the
upper portion. As a result the seedlings topple down and die.Pre emergence and post
emergence damping off occur. Pythium, Phytophthora, Fusarium cause these.
Eg : Damping-off tobacco, tomato, chilli, brinjal etc.
Rot : The affected tissues die, decompose to greater extent, and turn brown. fungi
dissolve the cell walls more or less completely by means of enzymes. According to the
plant part attacked the rot may be called root rot, leaf or stem rot, bud-rot and fruit rot.
Depending upon the type of dissolution brought about by the pathogen the rots may be
grouped as soft rot, wet rot or dry rot.
Eg : Bud rot of palmyrah ,Fruit rot of chilli
Wilts :The leaves and other green or succulent parts lose their turgidity, become flaccid,
usually seen first in some of the leaves. Later, the young growing tip or the whole plant
may suddenly or gradually dry up. Wilting may be the result of injury to the root system,
partial plugging of water conducting vessels or toxic substances secreted by the
pathogen.
Eg : Tomato wilt,Guava wilt
SYMPTOMS OF VIRAL DISEASES
External
1. Mosaic: Alternate green and yellow patches. Eg. Tmv
2. Vein clearing : Tissue close to vein is yellow and remaining area is green.Eg vein clearing of
bhendi.
3. Vein banding : Tissue along vein is green and tissue between veins is chlorotic.Eg tobacco
leaf curl.
4. Ring spot : circular chlorosis with green centre. Eg papaya ring spot.
5. Necrosis: death of cells in the stem Eg. Top rot of potato
6. Distortion / malformation :Leaves and flowers twisted, become narrow, end in rattail
appearance Eg.. Leaf curl of papaya
7. Enation : Masses of hypertrophoid tissue on leaf surface.Eg. Leaf curl of tobacco
8. Masked symptoms : Plants contain virus , but symptomless underunfavourable conditions.
Symptoms reappear under favourable conditions.
9.Stunting: stoppage of plant growth. Decrease in size of leaves, flowers, fruits etc Eg:Rice
dwarf
Internal
Hypertrophy, hyperplasia or hypoplasia
SYMPTOMS OF BACTERIAL DISEASES
Bacterial leaf spots and Blights: Spots on leaves of dicotyledonous plants initially water
soaked and often confined between the leaf veins and will appear angular. Sometimes a
chlorotic halo will surround the bacterial lesion of an infected leaf. Spots may coalesce causing
large areas of necrotic tissue. If the spots appear and advance rapidly the disease is considered
asblight. Bacterial spots will appear as streaks or stripes on monocotyledonous plants. genera
Pseudomonas and Xanthomonas.
Cankers: Canker symptoms can appear on stems, branches and fruits, leaves. when conditions
are highly favourable for infection causes girdling of the branches and trunks, can result in
corky growths.Ex: Citrus canker.
Bacterial Soft Rots:bacteria produce enzymes that causes disintegration of cells and rotting of
tissue becomes soft and watery, contains a slimy foul smelling ooze.Ex: Bacterial Soft Rot of
carrot, melon.
Bacterial Vascular Wilts: wilting and death of the aboveground parts of the plant. In some
cases bacterial ooze seeps out through stomata or cracks onto the surface of infected deadtissue
The causal pathogen enters, multiplies in, and moves through the xylem vessels of the host
plant and interferes with the translocation of nutrients and water.
Ex: Tomato wilt
Bacterial Galls/tumors: bacteria present in the soilgain entry into the host tissue through
wound in the host. Gall tissue in the vicinity of the wound- hyperplasia and hypertrophy.
Ex: Crown gall of Apple.
Study of Symptomology
A.Necrotic symptoms eg: Blight, Blotch, Decay, Dieback, Spot, Wilt, Yellowing
B.Hypertrophy/Hyperplasia eg; Callus, Witches broom, Scab,
C.Hypoplasia eg:Chlorosis, Dwarfing, Etiolation,
Signs:
1.Vegetative structures: Haustorium, Mycelium, Rhizomorph, sclerotia etc
2.Reproductive Products: Asci, Basidium, Conidiophores, Mildews, Mold, Sporangium,
Pycniia Sporodochium etc
3.Disease products: ooze in paddy blight, sugary disease in sorghum
SURVIVAL OF PLANT PATHOGENS
The means of survival are the first link in infection chain or disease cycle. The
initialinfection that occurs from the sources of pathogen survival in the crop is primary
infection and thepropagules thatcause this infection are called primary inoculum. After
initiation of the disease in thecrop, the spores or other structures of the pathogen are sources
of secondary inoculum
and cause secondary infection, thereby spreading the disease in the field.
SOURCES OF SURVIVAL OF PATHOGENS:
1) Infected host as reservoir of inoculum:
a) Seed: seed borne pathogenssurvive as long as seed remains viable.
b) Collateral hosts(wild hosts of same families):Collateral hostsare those which
aresusceptible to the plant pathogens of crop plants and provideadequate facilities for their
growth andreproduction of these pathogens during offseason. weed hosts help tobridge the
gap between two crop seasons.
c) Alternate hosts (wild hosts of other families): When a pathogen has very wide host
rangeand is tolerantto wide range of weather conditions the alternate hosts become very
important sourceof survival of the pathogen.
2) Saprophytic survival outside the host:
In the absence of the cultivated host plant, fungi are capable of surviving assaprophytes and
few in soil.
3) Survival as dormant spores or specialized resting structuresin or on the host or
outside the host:
Plant viruseshave no resting stage,plant bacteriado not produce resting spores
Nematodessurvive through dormant structures, i.e., eggs, cysts, galls, formed in host tissues.
Thesestructures may be present in soil or in seed lots
Phanerogamic parasites: They survive in dormant state for many years through seeds.
Fungi are the only organisms that produce spores for their inactive survival and in favorable
condition act as source of primary infection.
4) Survival in association with insects, nematodes and fungi
Several important plant pathogens may survive within the insect body and over wintertherein.
Few plant viruses survive with nematodes or fungi found in the soil between crop seasons.
DISPERSAL OF PLANT PATHOGENS
Transport ofinoculum from one host to another host at variousdistances resulting in the
spread of the disease, is called dispersalof plant pathogens. It is also importantfor continuity
of the life cycle of the pathogen. This knowledge is essential for control of plant diseases
becausepossibilities of preventing dispersal and therebybreaking the infection chain exist.
The dispersal of infectious plant pathogens in space occurs through two ways:
I) Autonomous or direct or active dispersal:
In this method the dispersal of plant pathogens takes place through soil, seed and planting
material during normal agronomic operations.
1) Seed as the source of autonomous dispersal:
2) Soil as a means of autonomous dispersal:
a) Dispersal in soil:
b) Dispersal by the soil:
3) The plant and the plant parts as a means of autonomous dispersal:
The plant parts that are used for vegetative propagation, raw fieldproduce and plant debris
that accumulates during the course of cropping.
II) Passive or Indirect dispersal:
1) Animate agents: Insects,Mites,Nematodes,birds, Farm and wild animals, phanerogamic
parasites andHuman beings inTransportation of seeds,Planting diseased seed materials
During adoption of normal farming practices, by use of contaminated implements
by use of diseased grafting and budding material
Vegetatively propagated crops-banana suckers, sugarcane setts, tuber crops, fruit plants
2) Inanimate agents: Wind and Irrigation water
PHENOMENON OF INFECTION/ INFECTION PROCESS
It is the third link in the infection chain.Infection process means establishment of pathogen
in the host plant.
The success of process of infection depends on
Susceptibility of host: It is genetically controlled by DNA and it is an inheritablecharacter
which is transmitted from parents to off springs.
Virulence of the pathogen: It is determined by genetic material whichis inheritable.
Fast multiplication rate of the pathogen: Chances of infection increases with high rateof
multiplication. High birth rate and low death rate is highly essential for successfulinfection.
Proper inoculum potential: In case of specialized pathogens very few or even onespore is
capable of causing infection successfully, whereas, non-specialized pathogensas Pythium,
Phytophthorarequire high density of inoculum for infection.
Environmental factors: temperature, relativehumidity, moisture, etc., are very important for
survival, dissemination and infectionprocess.
Stages in the development of infection or disease cycle/Process of infection
1. PRE-PENETRATION:
Plant viruses do not have any capacity to enter the hostcell so they do not make any
aggressive effort for entry, but depend on different insectvectors for their entry into host cell.
Bacteria have no dormant structures; hence no prepenetrationactivity except for
multiplication in infection drops on the natural openings.However, nematodes show some
orientation towards root surface before actualpenetration.In fungal pathogens, pre-penetration
includes spore germination and growth of theresulting germ tube on the surface of the host
plant. In some fungi thehypha act in a concerted way to achieve the penetration.
2. PENETRATION: Pathogens penetrate plant surfaces by direct penetration
orindirectlythrough wounds or natural openings. Bacteria enter plants mostly throughwounds
and less frequently through natural openings. Viruses,fastidious bacteria enter through
wounds made by vectors. Fungi, nematodes and parasitichigher plants enter through direct
penetration and less frequently through naturalopenings and wounds.
A. Indirect Penetration
1. Wounds: Wounds caused by farm operations, hail storms, or insect punctures, etc.will help
in the entry of different plant pathogens into the host cells.
2. Natural openings:a)stomatab) Lenticels:
B) Direct penetration: Most fungi, nematodes and parasitic higher plants are capable of
penetrating the host surface directly.
3. POST PENETRATION
Invasion and colonization: Infection is the process by which pathogens establish
contactwith the susceptible cells or tissues of the host and derive nutrients from them. A
parasiticrelationship is formed between host cytoplasm and parasite cytoplasm. During
infection,pathogens grow and multiply within the plant tissues. Invasion of plant tissues by
thepathogen, and growth and reproduction of the pathogen (colonization) are twoconcurrent
stages of disease development.
Fungi spread into all parts of host organs, either by growing directly through the cells asan
intracellular mycelium or by growing between the cells as an intercellular mycelium.During
establishment, pathogen produces different substances which include enzymes,toxins, growth
hormones and polysaccharides which will help in colonization of the host.
PRINCIPLES OF PLANT DISEASE MANAGEMENT
It conveys a concept of continuous process which is based not on theprinciple of eradication
of the pathogen but mainly on reducing the amount of inoculums and minimizing thedamage
or loss below economic injury level.
General principles of plant disease management
I. Avoidance of the pathogen: These methods aim at avoiding the contact between
thepathogen and susceptible stage of the crop. This is achieved by
a) Proper selection of geographical area: Many fungal and bacterial diseases are moresevere
in wet areas than in dry areas. Cultivation of bajra in wet areas is not profitabledue to smut
and ergot.
b) Proper selection of the field: This helps in the management ofmany soil borne diseases.
Avoid raising of a particular crop year afteryear in the same field to reduce severity.
Ex: Wilt of redgram, late blight of potato , green ear of bajra, etc.
c) Time of sowing: Alteration of date of sowing helps in avoidance ofcoincidence of
susceptible stage of host plant with favourable conditions for pathogen.
Ex: Rhizoctonia root rot of redgram is more severe in the crop sown immediately after
therains. Delayed sowing will help in reducing the incidence of disease.
d) Disease escaping varieties: Certain varieties of crops escape the disease because of
theirgrowth characteristics. Ex: Early maturing varieties of peaescape the damage due to
Erysiphe polygoni.
e) Proper selection of seed and planting material: Selection of seed and seedlingmaterial
from healthy sources will effectively manage the diseases such as loose smut ofwheat,
bunchy top of bananaand whip smut of sugarcane.
II. Exclusion of the pathogen: These measures aim at preventing the inoculum from
entering or establishing in the field or area where it does not exist.
a) Seed inspection and certification: Crops grown for seed purpose are inspectedperiodically
for the presence of diseases that are disseminated by seed. Necessaryprecautions are to be
taken to remove the diseased plants in early stages, and then thecrop is certified as disease
free.
b) Plant quarantine regulation: Plant quarantine is defined as “ a legal restriction on the
movement of agricultural commodities for the purpose of exclusion, prevention ordelaying
the spread of the plant pests and diseases in uninfected areas”.
c)Seed treatment: Seed and planting material is treated with hot air, gases or chemicals to
destroy the pathogen.
III. Eradication: Elimination of the pathogen from thearea by destruction of sources of
primary and secondary inoculum.
a) Rouging: Removal of diseased plants or their affected parts from field, whichprevent the
dissemination of plant pathogens.
b) Eradication of alternate and collateral hosts: Eradication of alternate hosts will help
in management of many plant diseases.
c) Crop rotation: Continuous cultivation of the same crop in the same field helps in the
perpetuation of the pathogen in the soil. Soils which are saturated by the pathogen areoften
referred as sick soils. To reduce the incidence and severity of many soil bornediseases, crop
rotation is adopted.
d) Biological methods: Reducing the intensity of pathogen, slowing the process of disease
formation, prevention of inoculmn on the plants etc. eg: Trichoderma viride, Pseudomonas
fluorescens
IV Protection:Spraying of chemicals to manage diseases and insecticides to control vector
transmitted viral diseases, nematicides and hot water treatment etc
Management of Diseases
Rusts
➢ use of resistant varieties
➢ Destruction of weeds and infected crop residues
➢ Adjusting date of sowing to avoid severe infection of plants in the field
➢ Crop rotation with non host crops
➢ Spray application of oxy-carboxin (0.2%), mancozeb (0.2%), triadimefon (0.05%), BM
(0.5%), COC (0.25%) and wettable S or zineb (0.2%)
Wilts
➢ Disease-free transplants and seed.
➢ Use of resistant varieties
➢ Soil solarization
➢ Prolonged crop rotation
➢ Soil fumigation with PCNB
➢ Seed treatment with carbendazim@ 2g/kg seed
➢ The use of antibiotic-producing soil fungi and bacteria i.e., Gliocladium sp., Trichoderma
sp. Pseudomonas spp.
➢ Addition of heavy doses of organic matter (green manure crops) to soil would suppress the
activity of the pathogen by enhancing antagonistic micro-organisms.
Downy mildews
➢ Destroyal of affected plants by burning before oospore formation, reduce the inoculum
➢ potential
➢ Crop rotation with other crops like pulses and oilseeds.
➢ Grow tolerant varieties
➢ Seed treatment with Metalaxyl (Apron 35 SD) @4g/kg seed
➢ Spray Metalaxyl (Ridomyl MZ) @0.2% or Mancozeb @0.25%.
Powdery mildews
➢ Removal and destruction of infected plant debris
➢ Use of resistant varieties
➢ Preventive sprays with wettable sulphur @0.3%
➢ Spraying with Karathane 0.1% (Dinocap) or Benomyl
Alternaria diseases
➢ Removal and destruction of infected plant debris
➢ Control of volunteers and weed hosts prior to planting the new crop
➢ Maintenance of adequate soil fertility levels
➢ Use of resistant varieties
➢ Disease free or treated seed (Mancozeb @2.5g/kg seed)
➢ Spray with mancozeb (@0.25%) or chlorothalonil (0.2%) or Iprodione (0.2%) at 10 days
interval.
Cercospora diseases
➢ Removal and destruction of infected plant debris
➢ Control of volunteers and weed hosts prior to planting the new crop
➢ Use of resistant varieties
➢ Spraying benomyl, Bordeaux mixture, mancozeb or chlorothalonil at 15 days interval.
Anthracnoses (conidia within black acervuli)
➢ Use of disease free seed
➢ Use of resistant varieties
➢ Destruction of collateral hosts
➢ Spraying with 1% B.M. or combination of zineb and captan 0.2% found to be effective
➢ Other fungicides: Benomyl, Chlorothalonil, Iprodione.
Smuts
➢ Control of volunteers and weed hosts prior to planting the new crop
➢ Use of resistant varieties
➢ Treat the seed with fine sulphur powder @0.5% or Captan or Thiram @0.3%.
➢ Follow crop rotation.
➢ Collect the smutted ear heads in cloth bags and dip in boiling water.
Ergot or Sugary disease
➢ Adjust the date of sowing so that the crop does not flower during the periods of high rainfall
and high humidity.
➢ Grow resistant varieties
➢ Deep summer ploughing
➢ Soaking seeds with 2% saline solution will aid to remove floatingergot infested seeds.
➢ Seed treatment with fungicides such as Captan or Thiram@4g/kg seed
➢ Spray Ziram (or) Zineb (or) Captan (or) Mancozeb @0.2% at emergence of earhead (5-10
per cent flowering stage) followed by a spray at 50 per cent flowering and repeat the spray
after a week, if necessary.
➢ Control of ergot with fungicides such as Propiconazole or Tebuconazole has proved to be
cost effective in seed production plots.
INTEGRATED PLANT DISEASE MANAGEMENT (IPDM)
IPDM involve management systems which utilize compatible combinations of all the
available techniques to keep the pathogen population below the economic threshold level
(ETL). IPDM is based on five principles of plant disease management and integrates
multidisciplinary approaches for the management of plant diseases.
Main components of IPDM:
1. Cultural practices
2. Regulatory measures (quarantine)
3. Chemical methods
4. Biological methods
5. Physical methods
6. Genetic engineering
Cultural practices
a) Crop sanitation: Collection and destruction of plant debris from soil will help in the
management of soil borne facultative saprophytes. It is an important method to reduce the
primaryinoculum.
b) Manures and fertilizers: The deficiency or excess of a nutrient may predispose a plant
to some diseases. Excessive nitrogen application aggravates diseases like stem rot,
bacterial leaf blight and blast of rice. Phosphorous and potash application increases the
resistance of the host.Addition of FYM or green manure, 60-100 t/ha,helps to manage the
diseases like cotton wilt, Ganoderma root rot of citrus, coconut, etc.
c) Mixed cropping: Root rot of cotton is reduced whencotton is grown along with sorghum.
Intercropping sorghum in cluster bean reduces theincidence of root rot and wilt
d) Summer ploughing: Ploughing the soil during summer months expose soil to hotweather
which will eradicate heat sensitive soil borne pathogens.
e) Soil amendments: Application of organic amendments like saw dust, straw, oil cake,
etc., will effectively manage the diseases caused by Pythium, Phytophthora, Verticillium,
andMacrophomina. Beneficial micro-organismsincreases in soil and helps in suppression of
pathogenic microbes.Ex: Application of lime reduces the club root of cabbage by increasing
soil
pH to 8.5, Application of Sulphur to soil brings the soil pH to 5.2 and reduces the
incidence of scab of potato
f) Changing time of sowing: Pathogens are able to infect susceptible plants under certain
environmental conditions. Alternation in date of sowing can help avoidance of favourable
conditions for the pathogens.
Ex: Rice blast can be managed by changing planting season from June toSeptember/October.
g) Seed rate and plant density: Close spacing raises atmospheric humidity and favours
sporulation by many pathogenic fungi. A spacing of 8’X8’ instead of 7’X7’ reduces
sigatoka disease of banana due to better ventilation and reduced humidity. High density
planting in chillies leads to high incidence of damping off in nurseries.
h) Irrigation and drainage: The amount, frequency and method of irrigation may affect
the dissemination of certain plant pathogens. Many pathogens, including, Pseudomonas
solanacearum, X. campestris pv. oryzae and Colletotrichum falcatum are readily
disseminated through irrigation water. High soil moisture favours root knot and other
nematodes and the root rots caused by species of Sclerotium, Rhizoctonia, Pythium,
Phytophthora, Phymatotrichum, etc.
PHYSICAL METHODS: Physical methods include soil solarization and hot water
treatments.
i. Soil solarization: Soil solarization is the soilheating by covering moist soil with
polyethylene sheets as soil mulchduring summer months for 4-6 weeks.
ii. Soil sterilization: Soil can be sterilized in green houses and sometimes in seed beds by
aerated steam or hot water. At about 500C, nematodes, some fungi are killed. At about 60 and
720C, most of the plant pathogenic fungi andbacteria are killed. At about 820C, most weeds,
plant pathogenic bacteria and insects arekilled. Heat tolerant weed seeds and some plant
viruses, such as TMV are killed at ornear the boiling point (95-1000C).
iii. Hot water or Hot air treatment: Hot water treatment or hot air treatment will
prevent the seed borne and sett borne infectious diseases. Hot water treatment is used for
controlling sett bornediseases of sugarcane [whip smut, grassy shoot and red rot of sugarcane
(520C for 30min)] and loose smut of wheat (520C for 10 min).
Biological methods:
Def: Biological control of plant disease is a condition or practice whereby survival or
activity of a pathogen is reduced through the agency of any other living organism , with the
result that there is reduction in incidence of the disease caused by the pathogen.
Mechanisms of biological control
1. Competition: Most of the biocontrol agents are fast growing and they compete with
plant pathogens for space, organic nutrients and minerals.
2. Antibiosis: Antagonism mediated by specific or non-specific metabolites of microbial
origin, by lytic agents, enzymes, volatile compounds or other toxic substances is known
as antibiosis.
3. Hyperparasitism: Direct parasitism or lysis and death of the pathogen by another
micro-organism when the pathogen is in parasitic phase is known as hyperparasitism.
Important fungal and bacterial biocontrol agents:T. virideand Pseudomonas fluorescens
CHEMICAL CONTROL
Fungicides are classified into three categories: Protectants, eradicants and therapeutants.
1. Protectants: These are the chemicals which are effective only when used beforeinfection
(prophylactic). Contact fungicides which kill the pathogen presenton the host surface when it
comes in contact with the host are called protectants. Theseare applied to seeds, plant
surfaces or soil. These are non-systemic in action . Ex: Zineb,sulphur, captan, Thiram, etc.
2. Eradicants: Those chemicals which eradicate the dormant or active pathogen from thehost.
They can remain on/in the host for some time. Ex: Lime sulphur.
3. Therapeutants: These are the agents that inhibit the development of a diseasesyndrome in
a plant when applied after infection by a pathogen. Therapy can be byphysical means (solar
and hot water treatment) and chemical means (by use of systemicfungicides).
Classification Of Fungicides Based On Chemical Nature
COPPER FUNGICIDES
Preparatory copper fungicides Proprietary copper fungicides or Fixed or
insoluble copper fungicides
1. Bordeaux mixture 1. Copper oxychloride
2.Bordeaux paste 2. Cuprous oxide
3.Cheshunt compound 3. Copper hydroxide
SULPHUR FUNGICIDES
Inorganic Sulphur Fungicides Organic Sulphur Compounds
1. Lime sulphur Dialkyl Monoalkyl
2. Sulphur dust Dithiocarbamates dithyiocarbamates
3. Wettable sulphur 1. Ziram 1. Nabam -Dithane D-14
2. Ferbam 2. Zineb- Dithane Z-78
3. Thiram 3.Vapam or Metham
sodium
4. Maneb - Dithane M45
HETROCYCLIC MISCELLANEOUS FUNGICIDES
NITROGENOUS COMPOUNDS
1.Captan 1. Chlorothalonil
2. Captafol 2. Dinocap
3. Difoltan
SYSTEMIC FUNGICIDES
ACYLALANINES AROMATIC HYDROCARBONS
1. Metalaxyl 1. Chloroneb
2. Benalaxyl
BENZIMIDAZOLES ALIPHATICS
1. Carbendazim 1. Prothiocarb
2. Benomyl 2. Propamocarb
3. Thiabendazole
OXATHINS or IMIDAZOLES
CARBOXIMIDES 1. Imazalil
1. Carboxin 2. Fanapanil
2. Oxycarboxin
MORPHOLINES ORGANOPHOSPHATES
1. Tridemorph 1. Kitazin
2. Ediphenphos
ALKYL PHOSPHONATES PYRIMIDINES
1. Fosetyl-Al 1. Fenarimol
THIOPHANATES STROBILURINS
1. Thiophanate 1. Azoxystrobin
2.Thiophanate methyl 2.Kresoxim methyl
TRIAZOLES QUINONES
1. Triadimefon 1.Chloranil
2. Tricyclazole
3.Hexaconazole
4. Propiconazole
MERCURIALS
Inorganic Organic
1.Mercuric chloride 1.Ethyl mercury chloride
Biocontrol agents
Fungal antagonists Bacterial antagonists
Trichoderma viride Bacillus subtulis
T harzianum Agrobacterium radiobacter
T. polysporum Pseudomonas fluorescens
Gliocladium virens
Actinomycetes antagonists Antibiotics
Streptomyces griseous Aureofungin
Griseofungin
CLASSIFICATION OF FUNGICIDES BASED ON METHOD OF APPLICATION
1. Seed protectants: Ex. Captan, thiram, carbendazim, carboxin etc.
2. Soil fungicides (preplant): Ex. Bordeaux mixture, copper oxy chloride, Chloropicrin,
Formaldehyde, Vapam, etc.
3. Soil fungicides: Ex. Bordeaux mixture, copper oxy chloride, Captan, PCNB, thirametc.
4. Foliage and blossom: Ex. Capton, ferbam, zineb, mancozeb, chlorothalonil etc.
5. Fruit protectants: Eg. Captan, maneb, carbendazim, mancozeb etc.
6. Eradicants: EX. Lime sulphur
7. Tree wound dressers: Ex. Boreaux paste, chaubattia paste, etc.
8. General purpose sprays and dust formulations.
Method of applications:
1.Broadcaast
2.Furrow application
3.Soil drenching
4.Fumigation
HOST PLANT RESISTANCE (IMMUNIZATION)
Advantages of resistant varieties:
1. Resistant varieties can be the most simple, practical, effective and economical methodof
plant disease management.
2.cost effective
3. do not pollute environment.
Types of resistance:
1. Genetical resistance:
2. Biochemical resistance:
Host plant resistance is introduced in 3 ways
1.Selection and Hybridization: Disease tolerant low yielding variety is selected and
hybridized with high yielding disease intolerant variety to obtain disease tolerant high
yielding variety.
2.Genetic engineering and Tissue culture: Genetic changes are done in plants to develop
virus resistant, insect resistant, herbicide tolerant , disease tolerant, stress resistant, nutrient
enriched plants.
3.Induction of Acquired resistance: Due to some microorganisms and chemicals plants
acquire resistance. When phosphates &carbonates are sprayed on leaves, resistant genes are
activated.
4.Spraying of Systemic fungicides and Antibiotics
IPDM strategy in rice:
1. Selection of healthy seed
2. Selection of resistant cultivars
3. Removal and destruction of collateral hosts
4. Balanced fertilization
5. Rouging of diseased plants
6. Seed treatment with carbendazim or tricyclazole at 2g/Kg seed
7. Need based foliar application of carbendazim@0.1% or Tricyclazole@0.06% for the
management of blast.
8. Need based foliar application of validamycin for the management of sheath blight and
sheath rot.
9. Soil application of carbofuran granules or foliar spray of any systemic fungicide is
to manage insect vectors, thereby decreasing the spread of viral diseases.
IPDM in sugarcane:
1. Collection and destruction of infected crop debris
2. Hot water treatment of setts (520C for 30 min)
3. Hot air treatment of setts (540C for 2-3 hrs)
4. Balanced irrigation and fertilization
5. Avoid selection of seed material from Ratoon crop
6. Need based spray of systemic insecticides to minimize the spread of viral and
phytoplasmal diseases
7. Selection of disease resistant or tolerant cultivars
Lecture 16& 17
DISEASES OF RICE (ORYZA SATIVA)
Blast- Pyricularia oryzae
Symptoms
The fungus attacks the crop at all stages from seedlings in nursery to heading in mainfield.
The typical symptoms appear on leaves, leaf sheath, rachis, nodes and even theglumes.
Leaf blast: On the leaves, the lesions start as small water soaked bluish green
specks,soonenlarge and form characteristic spindle shapedspots with grey centre and
darkbrown margin. The spots join together as the disease progresses and large areas of
theleaves dry up and wither. Similar spots are also formed on the sheath. Severelyinfected
nursery and field show a burnt appearance.
Node blast: In infected nodes, irregular black areas that encircle the nodes can benoticed.
The affected nodes may break up and all the plant parts above the infectednodes may die
Neck blast: At the flower emergence, the fungus attacks the peduncle which isengirdled, and
the lesion turns to brownish-black. This stage of infection is commonlyreferred to as rotten
neck/neck rot/neck blast/panicle blast. In early neck infection,grain filling does not occur and
the panicle remains erect like a dead heart caused by astem borer. In the late infection, partial
grain filling occurs. Small brown to black spotsalso may be observed on glumes of the
heavily infected panicles.
Fungus survives on plant residues, seeds, weeds. Air dispersal of pathogen. Fungus grows if
favourable weather conditions prevail for a week and crop is destroyed. Closer planting, high
N application favors disease spread. Light rainfall with Min temp 20-220c, 90%RH is
favorable.
Management
Use of seeds from a disease free crop
Grow resistant varieties like Simhapuri, Tikkana, Sriranga, Phalguna,
Swarnadhan,Swarnamukhi, MTU 1005, Swathi, IR 64, Sravani,Jaya, Vijaya, Ratna,
Remove and destroy the weed hosts in the field bunds and channels.
Split application of nitrogen and judicious application of nitrogenous fertilizers
Spray the field with Edifenphos@0.1% or Tricyclazole@0.06%
Brown Spot or Sesame leaf spot - Helminthosporium oryzae
Symptoms
The fungus attacks the crop from seedling to milk stage.Symptoms most prominent on leaf
blade and glumes as spots. several spots coalesce andthe leaf dries up. The seedlings die and
affected nurseries can often be recognized from adistance by their brownish scorched
appearance. Dark brown or black spots also appearon glumes. Itcauses failure of seed
germination, seedling mortality and reduces the grain quality andweight. Deficiency of
potassium predispose the plants to heavyinfection.
Management
Use disease free seeds, Field sanitation.Crop rotation,Adjustment of planting time,
Proper fertilization, Use of slow release nitrogenous fertilizers is advisable.
Good water management, Use of soil amendments
Grow disease tolerant varieties viz., Bala, IR-20, Jaya, Ratna, Tellahamsaand Kakatiya.
Treat the seeds with Thiram or Captan at 4 g/kg and with Mancozeb @0.3%
Spray the crop in the main field twice with Mancozeb@0.2%, once after flowering and
second spray at milky stage.
Bacterial leaf blight-Xanthomonas oryzae
Symptoms
The bacterium induces either wilting of plants or leaf blight. Wilt syndrome known asKresek
is seen in seedlings within 3-4 weeks after transplanting. The bacteriumenters through the
hydathodes and cut wounds in the leaf tips, becomes systemic andcause death of entire
seedling.
The disease is usually noticed at the time of heading.In grown up plants water soaked,
translucent lesions appear usually near the leaf margin.The lesions enlarge both in length and
width with a wavy margin and turn straw yellowwithin a few days, covering the entire leaf.
Milky or opaque dew drops containing bacterialmasses are formed on young lesions in the
early morningleaving a white encrustation. The affected grains have discoloured spots
surrounded by
water soaked areas. If the cut end of leaf is dipped in water, bacterial ooze makes thewater
turbid.
Favourable Conditions
Clipping of tip of the seedling at the time of transplanting, heavy rain, heavy dew,flooding,
deep irrigation water, severe wind, temperature of 25-300C and application ofexcessive
nitrogen,
Management
Grow resistant cultivars like MTU 9992, Swarna, Ajaya, IR 20, IR 42, IR 50, IR 54,
TKM 6, Mashuri, IET 4141, IET 1444, IET 2508, Chinsura Boro, etc.
Affected stubbles are to be destroyed by burning or through ploughing
Judicious use of nitrogenous fertilizers
Avoid clipping of tip of seedling at the time of transplanting.
Avoid flooded conditions or drying of the field (not at the time of flowering)
Avoid flow of irrigation water from infected to healthy field
Remove and destroy weed hosts.
Soaking seeds for 8 hrs in Agrimycin (0.025%) followed by hot water treatment for 10
minutes at 52-54oC eradicates the bacterium in the seed
Spray Streptocycline (250 ppm) along with copper oxychloride (0.3%)
Sheath blight-Rhizoctonia solani
Symptoms
The fungus affects the crop from tillering to heading stage. Initial symptoms are oval or
elliptical or irregular greenish grey spots on leaf sheaths near water level which coalesce
causing death of the whole leaf, and in severe cases all the leaves of a plant may be blighted
in this way. The infection extends to the inner sheaths resulting in death of the entire plant.
Older plants are highly susceptible. Five to six week old leaf sheaths are highly susceptible.
Plants heavily infected in the early heading and grain filling growth stages produce poorly
filled grain, especially in the lower part of the panicle.
spread through irrigation water. High relative humidity (96-97 per cent), high temperature
(30-320C), closer planting and heavy doses of nitrogenous fertilizers favor disease.
Management
Avoid excess doses of fertilizers.
Adopt optimum spacing.
Eliminate weed hosts.
Apply organic amendments.
Avoid flow of irrigation water from infected fields to healthy fields.
Deep ploughing in summer and burning of stubbles.
Spray Propiconazole@0.1% or Hexaconazole@0.2% or Validamycin@0.2%
Sheath rot-Sarocladium oryzae
Symptoms
Sheath rot occurs usually at the booting stage. Initial symptoms are noticed only on the upper
most leaf sheath. The flag leaf sheath show oblong or irregular greyish brown spots. The
young panicles may remain within the sheath or emerge partially. The affected sheath and
panicles rot and abundant whitish powdery fungal growth is formed inside the leaf sheath.
The grain discolours and shrivels.
Favourable Conditions
Closer planting, high doses of nitrogen, high humidity and temperature around 25-300C.
Injuries made by leaf folder, brown plant hopper and mites increase infection. Spread
Mainly through air-borne conidia and also seed-borne.
Management
Apply recommended doses of fertilizers.
Adopt optimum spacing.
Spray twice with Carbendazim @0.1% or Benomyl@0.05% or Mancozeb@0.2% or
Chlorothalonil@0.2% at boot leaf stage and 15 days later.
Soil application of gypsum in 2 equal splits (500 kg/ha) reduces incidence.
Tungro disease
Symptoms
Infection occurs both in the nursery and in the main field. Plants are markedly stunted.
Leaves show yellow to orange discoloration and interveinal chlorosis. Young leaves are
often mottled with pale green to whitishinterveinal stripes and the old leaves may have rusty
streaks of various sizes. The plantsmay be killed if infected early.Tillering is reduced with
poor root system. The infectedplants have few spikelets and panicles are small with
discoloured grains. spread by green leaf hoppers.
Management
Summer deep ploughing and burning of stubbles.
Destroy weed hosts of the virus and vectors.
Grow disease tolerant cultivars like MTU 9992, 1002, 1003, 1005, Suraksha,Vikramarya,
Bharani, IR 36,vedgiri.
Control the vectors in the nursery by application of carbofuran granules @170 g/cent,
10 days after sowing and @10kg/ac in main filed
Spray Monochrotophos@2.2 ml/lt or Phosphamidan @1ml/lt orEthophenphos@1.5ml/lt or
Neem oil @3 per cent in the main field 15 and 30 DAT to control leaf hoppers.
LECTURE 18
DISEASES OF SORGHUM (SORGHUM BICOLOR)
Anthracnose or red leaf spot-Colletotrichum graminicola
Symptoms
The fungus causes both leaf spot (anthracnose) and stalk rot (red rot) in sorghum. The
disease appears as small spots on both surfaces of the leaf. The centre of thespot is white in
colour encircled by red, purple or brown margin. Stalk and inflorescenceinfection can be
characterized externally by the development of circular cankers. Infectedstem when split
open shows discoloration.
Management
Destruction of infected plant debris and collateral hosts like sudan grass, Johnson grass
Crop rotation with non-host crops
Grow resistant varieties like SPV 162, CSV 17, CSH10, SPV475,Texas Milo and Tift sudan
etc.
Treat the seeds with Captan or Thiram @3 g/kg.
Spray the crop with Mancozeb @0.25% or carbendazim@0.1%
Rust-Puccinia purpurea
Symptoms
The fungus affects the crop at all stages of growth. The intensity of rust infection isgenerally
severe after flag leaf stage . The first symptoms are smallreddish brown flecks on the lower
surface of the leaf . Pustules appear on both surfaces of leaf as purplish spots . The pustules
are elliptical andlie between and parallel with the leaf veins. Pustules are surrounded by a
reddish oryellow halo. In highly susceptible cultivars, the pustules occur so densely that
almost theentire leaf is destroyed. The pustules may also occur onthe leaf sheaths and on the
stalks of inflorescence.
Management
Grow resistant varieties like CSH 5, SPV 13, 81, 126, PSH 1, CSV 17, etc.
Remove and destroy the alternate hosts-weeds
Spray the crop with Mancozeb @0.25%, Dusting of sulphur@25 kg/ha
Ergot or Sugary disease-Claviceps sorghi or Sphacelia sorghi
Symptoms
The disease is confined to individual spikelets. The first symptom is the secretion ofhoney
dew from infected florets attracting large number of insects and ants which help in spreading
the disease. Under favourable conditions, grain is replaced by hard black sclerotia. white
spots can be seen onthe soil surface, denoting the drops of honey dew.
Management
Adjust the date of sowing so that the crop does not flower during the periods of high
rainfall and high humidity.
Grow resistant varieties like SPV 191, CSH 5, SPH 1 and CS3541.
Deep summer ploughing
Soaking seeds with 2% saline solution will aid to remove floating ergot infested seeds.
Seed treatment with fungicides such as Captan or Thiram@4g/kg seed
Spray Ziram or Mancozeb @0.2% at emergence of earhead(5-10 per cent flowering stage)
followed by a spray at 50 per cent flowering and repeatafter a week, if necessary.
Control of ergot with fungicides such as Propiconazole or Tebuconazole has proved to
be cost effective in seed production plots.
Downy Mildew or Leaf shredding-Peronosclerospora sorghi
Symptoms
The first few leaves that show symptoms are only partially infected with green or yellow
colouration. Abundant downy whitish growth is produced on thelower surface of the leaves,
spreads over a major portion of the uppersurface. As the plant grows, white streaks appear
on both the surfaces of the leaves. Thetissues then tear along the streaks causing shredding of
the leaves which is the mostcharacteristic symptom. The tissue then turns brownin colour.
The affected parts arestunted and sterile. More prevalent in waterlogged soils. affected
panicle has partially filled or fully unfilled grains.
Management
Destroy affected plants by burning before oospore formation reduce the inoculums potential
Crop rotation with other crops like pulses and oilseeds.
Grow tolerant varieties like CSH 2, CSV 5, SPV 101, 165 and 190.
Seed treatment with Metalaxyl @4g/kg seed
Spray Metalaxyl @0.2% or Mancozeb @0.25%
Leaf blight or leaf stripe-Exserohilum turcicum
Symptoms
The leaf blight pathogen also causes seed rot and seedling blight.Initially diseaseappears in
the form of small narrow elongated spindle shaped spots later become bigger.On older plants,
the typical symptoms are long elliptical necrotic lesions, straw colouredin the centre with
dark margins. Manylesions may develop and coalesce on the leaves, destroying large areas of
leaf tissue,giving the crop a distinctly burnt appearance leading to premature drying of leaves.
Management
Use disease free seeds, Rotation with non susceptible crops
Collect and destroy infected plant debris,Treat the seeds with Captan or Thiram at 3 g/kg.
Spray the crop with Mancozeb@0.25% at the age of 40 days and the spraying have to
be repeated twice at 15 days interval
Grain smut/Kernel smut/Covered smut/Short smut-Sphacelotheca sorghi
Symptoms
The disease becomes apparent only at the time of grain formation in the ear. Theindividual
grains are replaced by smut sori(covered with white layer which often persist unbroken upto
threshing)which can be localized at a particular part ofthe head or occur over the entire
inflorescence. Ratoon crops exhibithigher incidence of disease.temperature below 290c,
>80%humidity in air favor occurrence of disease
Management
Use disease free seeds, Follow crop rotation.sowing before onset of severe cold weather.
Grow resistant varieties like T 29/1, PJ 7K, PJ 23K, Nandyal and Bilichigan.
Treat the seed with fine sulphur powder @0.5% or Captan or Thiram @0.3%.
Collect the smutted ear heads and burn them.
Lecture 19
DISEASES OF MAIZE (ZEA MAYS)
Turcicum Leaf blight- Helminthosporium turcicum
Symptoms
Disease is characterized by long elliptical grayish green or tan lesions on the leaves. The
fungus affects the maizeplant at young stage. The spots coalesce to form bigger spots
andgives blighted appearance. Lesions may be extended to husk.
Management
Crop rotation,
Spray Mancozeb@0.25%
Post flowering stalk rot
Cephalosporium wilt -Cephalosporium acremonium/ C.maydis
Symptoms
Infection caused by C. acremonium becomes apparent in doughstage. One of the first
symptoms is the purpling of leaves and stalks. The mostcharacteristic symptom is the
restricted blackening of vascular bundles through several internodes in the stalk
withshredding of the internodal pith region. Barren plants, excessive tillering and multiple
ears are theother symptoms.
Symptoms caused by C. maydis appear only after flowering stage and plants start
wiltingbasipetally giving a dull green appearance of the leaves which later dry up. The
lowerinternode turns discoloured, become reddish brown, shrunken and soft, and
subsequentlybecomes dry and hollow. When diseased stalks are split open, reddish brown
vascularbundles are seen.
Management
Crop sanitation, Crop rotation, Avoid water stress at flowering
Seed treatment with Thiram or captan@3g/kg seed
Grow resistant varieties like DHM-103, DHM 105, Hi-Starch and Ganga Safed-2.
Charcoal rot-Macrophomina phaseolina
Symptoms
Charcoal rot commonly attacks plants approaching maturity in rabi crops when temperatures
are high. water soaked lesions on the roots that later turn black. As the plant matures, the
infectionextends into the lower portions of the stem leading to premature ripening,shredding
and breaking of thecrown. Split open stalks have numerous black sclerotia giving a charred
appearance.
Management
Field sanitation, crop rotation .Avoid high nitrogen usage and potash deficiency
Irrigate the crops at the time of earhead emergence to maturity.
Banded leaf and sheath blight-Rhizoctonia solani
Symptoms
Large, discoloured areas alternating with irregular dark bands are typical symptoms of
thedisease. Severe infection leads to blotching of the leaf sheath as well as leaves.
Thesymptoms under favourable conditions extend upto silk, glumes and kernels. Symptoms
also appear on stalk and theinternodes break at the point of infection. High nitrogen, cloudy
weather, drizzling , high humidity in air, 23-250c temperature favor disease. spread by weeds,
water and cropresiduesManagement
Clean cultivation, Destruction of crop debris, Detrashing of leaves near to soil.
Spray carbendazim or propiconazole@0.1%
Lecture 20
DISEASES OF BAJRA OR PEARL MILLET (PENNISETUM TYPHOIDES)
Downy mildew or Green ear-Sclerospora graminicola
Symptoms
The firstsymptoms can appear in seedlings at three to four leaf stage. The affected leaves
show
patches of light green to light yellow colour on the upper surface of leaves and
thecorresponding lower surface bears white downy growth of the fungus.The
yellowdiscolouration often turns to streaks along veins. The infected plants tiller
excessivelyand are dwarfed. As the diseaseadvances, the streaks turn brown and the leaves
shred atthe tips only. Ears fail to form or if formed, they are completely or
partiallymalformed into twisted green leafy structures; hence the name green ear disease.
Theinfection converts the various floral parts intogreen linear leafy structures.
Management
Selection of seed from healthy crop,Summer deep ploughing,Rogue out infected plants
Collect diseased plants especially before oospores are formed and burn them.
Prolonged crop rotation
Grow resistant varities like WCC 75, PHB 10, ICMH 451 ICTP 8203, Mallikarjuna,
HB-1, HB 5 and PHB 14
Grow tolerant varieties like MBH 118, CM 46, Balaji composite, Nagarjuna
composite, Visakha composite, New vijaya composite, RBS 2, etc.
Treat the seeds with Metalaxyl @6g/kg or Thiram or Captan@4g/kg.
Spray Mancozeb@0.25% or Metalaxyl @0.2% starting from 30 days
after sowing in the field.
Rust-Puccinia penniseti
Symptoms
Symptoms first appear mostly on lower leaves as minute, round raised reddish
brownpustules. The pustulesmay also be formed on stem and peduncles. In severe infections,
whole leaf maywither completely presenting a scorched appearance to the field.cool weather
high humidity in air favor disease spread.
Management
Removal and destruction of alternate hosts
Spray thrice at 15 days interval with Wettable Sulphur@0.3% or Mancozeb@0.2%
starting from 21 days after planting
Grow resistant varieties like RT 814-3, PT 826/4, PT 829/5, etc.
Ergot or Sugary disease-Claviceps fusiformis or C. microcephala
Symptoms
Exudation of small droplets of light pinkish or brownish stickyfluid (honey dew) from the
infected spikelets which trickles onto the upper leaves makingthem sticky. This attracts
several insects. In the later stages, the infected ovary turns intosmall dark brown sclerotial
bodies larger than the seed and with a pointed apex whichprotrude from the florets in place of
grain.Insects and air help in disease spread.
Management
Adjust the sowing date so that the crop does not flower during September when high
rainfall and high relative humidity favour the disease spread.
Collection of seeds from healthy field. Deep summer ploughing.
Immerse the seeds in 10 per cent common salt solution and remove the floatingsclerotia.
Eradication of collateral hosts
Grow resistant varieties like PHB 10, 14; Co 2, 3 and Bajra 24.
Spray with Ziram@0.2% or Carbendazim@0.1% or Mancozeb@0.2% at boot leaf and
flowering stage
RAGI / FINGER MILLET (Eleusine coracana)
Blast-Pyricularia grisea
Symptoms
Infection may occur at all stages of plant growth. Young seedlings may be blasted orblighted
in the nursery bed as well as developing young plants in the main field. There arethree stages
in disease development.
Leaf blast: It is more severe in tillering phase. Spindleshaped spots on the leaves with gray
centres surrounded by reddish brown margins.
Node blast: Infection on stem causes nodes breakat the point of infection. All the parts above
the infected node die.
Neck blast: At flowering stage, the neck just below the earhead is affected and turns sooty
black in colour and usually breaks at this point. In early neck infections, the entire earhead
becomes chaffy and there is no grain set at all. If grain setting occurs, they are shrivelled
and reduced in size.
Management
Destruction of collateral hosts and infected plant debris
Spray withCarbendazim@0.2% or Edifenphos@0.1%,
first spray immediately after symptom appearance and second spray at flowering stage.
Lecture 21
DISEASES OF COTTON
1) Bacterial leaf blight: Xanthomonas campestris pv. malvacearum
symptoms
The bacterium attacks all stages from seed to harvest.Seedling blight,Vein
necrosis,Black arm( breaking of the stem which hang as a dry black twig), Boll rot
Management
Remove and destroy the infected plant debris,Rogue out the volunteer cotton plants and
weeds Delint the cotton seeds with concentrated sulphuric acid at 125ml/kg of seed
Soak the seeds in 1000 ppm Streptomycin sulphate overnight or treat the seedwith hot
water at 52-560C for 10-15 minutes
Spray with Streptomycin sulphate 500 ppm along withCOC@0.3%.
Grow resistant varieties like HG-9 and Sujatha
2) Fusarium wilt: Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. vasinfectum
symptoms
The disease affects the crop at all stages. Discolouration of young leaves from the
margins towards midrib, gradually turn brown&dropoff ,Browning or blackening of
vascular tissues. Black streaks or stripes may be seen extending upwards to the
branches anddownwards to lateral roots
Management
Treat the acid-delinted seeds with Chlorothalonil at 4 g/kg or Carbendazim@2g/kg
seed
Remove and burn the infected plant debris in the soil
Multiply Trichoderma viride (2kg) in 50 kg of FYM for 15 days and then apply to the soil
Apply heavy doses of FYM or other organic manures at 10 t/ha
Spot drench with 0.05 per cent Benomyl or Carbendazim.
Grow disease resistant varieties like Varalakshmi, Vijaya, Pratap, Jayadhar, Jyothi and G
22
3) Verticillium wilt: Verticillium dahliae
symptoms
The symptoms are seen when the crop is in squares and bolls.
Leaf margins and areas between veins turn yellowish, necrotic and fall off.
Infected stem and roots, when split open, show a pinkish brown discolouration (Tiger
stripe)
Management
Treat the delinted seeds with Carboxin@4g/kg or Carbendazim at 2 g/kg
Remove and destroy the infected plant debris
Apply heavy doses of FYM or compost at 10t/ha
Spot drench with 0.05 per cent Benomyl or Carbendazim.
Grow disease resistant varieties like Sujatha and Suvin
4) Macrophomina root rot: Rhizoctonia bataticola
symptoms
sudden and complete wilting of plants in patches in concentric circles at the time of
maturity
rotting of entire root systemexcept tap root and few laterals
Management
Apply FYM@100 t/ha or neem cake at 2.5t/ha.
Treat the seeds with Trichoderma viride @ 4g/kg or Pseudomonas fluorescens@10g/kg of
seed
Treat the seeds with Carboxin or Thiram at 4 g or Carbendazim at 2g/kg
Spot drench with 0.1% Carbendazim or 0.05% Benomyl
5) Grey/ areolate mildew: Ramularia areola
symptoms
The entire leaf surface is covered by white to grey powdery growth
The affected leaves dry up from margin, turn yellowish brown and fall offprematurely
Management
Remove and burn the infected crop residues
Rogue out the self-sown cotton plants during summer months.
Avoid excessive application of nitrogenous fertilizers/manures
Spray twice with Carbendazim@0.1% at weekly intervals
Grow the resistant varieties like Sujatha and Varalakshmi
6) Anthracnose: Colletotrichum capsici
symptoms
Small reddish circular spots are produced on the cotyledons and primaryleaves
Girdling of the stem at collar region resulting in death of seedlings. In mature plants,
stem splitting andshredding of bark.Small water soaked, circular, reddish brown
depressed spots appear on thebolls which is the characteristic symptom of the disease.
The infected bolls cease to grow and burst and dry up prematurely
Management
Remove and burn the infected plant debris,bolls in the soil and weeds
Treat the delinted seeds with Carbendazim or Carboxin@2g/kg or Thiram orCaptan at
4g/kg
Spray the crop at boll formation stage with Mancozeb@0.25% or COC@0.3% or
Carbendazim@0.1%
7) Leaf spots: Alternaria macrospora
symptoms
Small brown, round spots surrounded by a purple margin appear on older
leaves with concentric zonations,Several spots coalesce together to form blighted areas
under humidconditions
Management
Remove and destroy the infected plant residues
Spray Mancozeb@0.25% or Copper oxychloride@0.3% at the initiation of thedisease.
8) Rust: Phakopsora gossypii
symptoms
Bright yellow orange pustules with purple borders appear under surface ofthe lower
leaves which eventually turn brown
Severe infections may cause defoliation and reduction in the size of the bolls
Management
Remove and destroy infected plant debris,Spray Mancozeb@0.25%
DISEASES OF SUGARCANE (SACCHARUM OFFICINARUM)
Red rot-Colletotrichum falcatum
Symptoms
The first external symptoms appear as discolourationof the young leaves. The marginsand
tips of the leaves wither and the leaves droop. The discolouration and witheringcontinues
from the tip to the leaf base until the whole crown withers away in four to eightdays.
Symptoms observed by longitudinally splitting the internodes arereddening of the internal
tissues. The presence ofcross-wise white patchesinterrupting the reddened tissues are the
important diagnosticcharacter of the disease. Split open stems emit a characteristic acidic-
sour odour. As thedisease advances the entire stem rots and the stalk becomes hollow and
covered withwhite mycelial growth. Later the rind shrinks longitudinally with minute black,
velvety fruiting bodies protruding out of it.
Minute red spotsalso appear on the upper surface of leaves and centre of the mid-rib. The
lesions are initially blood red withdark margins and later on with straw coloured centres.
Often the infected leaves maybreak at the lesions and hang down, with large number of
minute black dots. yield and sugar % decreases. Spreads by setts
Management
Removal and destruction of infected plant debris, stubbles and trash.
Deep tillage to incorporate the left over debris.
Adopt crop rotation by including rice and green manure crops.
Select the setts from the disease free fields or disease free area.
Avoid ratooning of the diseased crop.
Avoid flow of irrigation water from diseased to healthy plants.
Soak the setts in 0.1% Carbendazim solution for 20 minutes before planting.
Hot water treatment of setts at 520C for 30 min or 500C for 2 hours followed by
steeping in 0.1% carbendazim solution.
Setts can be treated with aerated steam at 520C for 4 to 5 hours and by moist hot air at
540C for 2 hours.
Grow resistant varieties like CO 6907, CO 7219, CO 8013, CO 8021, CO 7706, CO A
7602, CO A 89082, CO A 89085, 87 A 397, CO T 8201, etc.
Whip Smut-Ustilago scitaminea
Symptoms
The affected plants are stunted and the central shoot is converted into a long whip-like,
dusty black structure. In early stages, this structure is covered by a thin, white papery
membrane. On maturity it ruptures and millions of tiny black smut spores are liberated and
disseminated by wind. All the shoots arising from the diseased clump produce whip like
structures. The primary spread of the disease is through diseased setts ,secondary spread is
through the smut spores developed in the whips, aided by air . The fungus also survives on
collateral hosts. Mono-culturing, continuous ratooning and dry weather during tillering stage
favours the disease.
Management
Plant healthy setts taken from disease free area.
Remove and destroy the smutted clump.
Discourage ratooning of the diseased crops having more than 10 per cent infection.
Follow crop rotation with green manure crops or dry fallowing.
Grow redgram as a companion crop between 2 rows of sugarcane.
Treat the setts in hot water at 500C for 2 hours.
Grassy shoot-Phytoplasma
Symptoms
The disease symptoms are usually seen two months after planting. The disease
ischaracterized by the production of numerous lanky tillersfrom the base of the
affectedshoots. Leavesbecome yellowand narrow. The plantsappear bushyand ‘grass like’
due to reduction in the length of internodes, premature andcontinuous tillering. The affected
clumps are stunted and in many instances exhibitpremature proliferation of auxillary buds. In
a diseased clump one or two thin, weakand small canes are produced.
Management
Plant disease free setts.Remove and burn the infected clumps periodically.
Avoid ratooning in problem areas
Hot Water Treatment (HWT) of setts at 520C for 30min.
Control vector by spraying Malathion or Dimethoate@2ml/lt
Lecture 22
DISEASES OF GROUND NUT (Arachis hypogea)
Tikka leaf spots
Early leaf spot: Cercospora arachidicola Late leaf spot: Phaeoisariopsis personata
Symptoms
The tikka disease occurs as two types of leaf spots, caused by two species ofCercosporidium.
Early leaf spot : Symptoms usually appear within 35 DAS on the leaflets as elongated,
elliptical spots withdefinite border. The leaf spots areirregularly circular , reddish brown or
dark brown on the uppersurface and are surrounded by a bright yellow halo. On the under
surface, spots are lightbrown to tan coloured. Several spots coalesce and result in drying of
the leaves.
Late leaf spot : Leaf spots appearafter 35 DAS.The spots on leaves are circular with bright
yellow halo aroundmature spots, usually darker than early leaf spots. On the under surface of
the leaves thehalo is not seen. Severely diseased leaves dry up and results inheavy
defoliation.
Loss ofphotosynthetic tissue leads to reduction in yield and quality of nuts.
Favourable Conditions
Prolonged high relative humidity for 3 days, low temperature (25-300C) with dew on leaf
surface, heavy doses of nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers and deficiency of magnesium
in soil favours the disease. Air dispersal
Management
Remove and destroy the infected plant debris.
Eradicate the volunteer groundnut plants.
Crop rotation with millets. Avoid mono cropping
Treat the seeds with Captan or Thiram at 4g/kg or Carbendazim@0.2%
Spray Carbendazim@0.1% or Mancozeb@0.2% or Chlorothalonil@0.2% and if
necessary, repeat after 15 days.
Grow resistant varieties like Vemana(early and late leaf spots), Naveen, Tirupathi-3
(early leaf spot only).
Rust-Puccinia arachidis
Symptoms
The disease is usually found when theplants are about 6 weeks old. Small, minute pale yellow
to light brown pustulesappear on the lower surface of leaves. Corresponding to the uredosori,
small, necrotic, brown spots appear on the uppersurface of leaves. The rust pustules may be
seen on petioles and stem. In severe infectionlower leaves dry and drop prematurely. The
severe infection leads to production of smalland shriveled seeds.
Management
Avoid mono-culturing of groundnut.
Remove volunteer groundnut plants and collateral hosts.
Spray Chlorothalonil or Tridemorph@0.2%.
Bud necrosis -Tomato spotted wilt virus
Symptoms
First symptoms are visible 2-6 weeks after sowing as ring spots on leaves. Stem also exhibits
necrotic streaks. As the plant matures, itbecomes generally stunted with short internodes and
short auxillary shoots. Leafletsformed on these auxillary shoots show a wide range of
symptoms including reduction insize, distortion of the lamina, mosaic mottling and general
chlorosis. In advancedconditions, the necrosis of bud occurs. Drastic reduction in flowering
is noticed andseeds produced are abnormally small and wrinkled with the dark black lesions
on the
testa and reduced germination capacity.The virus is transmitted by thrips. Early sown crop
(first half of june) shows lower incidence of PBND than late sowncrop (late June)
Management
Uprooting and burning of diseased plants.
Grow resistant varieties like Kadiri 3, Kadiri 4, Vemana, ICGS-11, etc.
Maintain optimum plant population and adopt spacing of 15x15cm
Intercropping with Bajra.
Spray monochrotophos@1.6ml/lt or dimethoate@2ml/lt for vector control
LECTURE 23
DISEASES OF CASTOR (RICINUS COMMUNIS)
Wilt-Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ricini
Symptoms
The disease appears in patches. Plants are attacked at all growth stages. When seedlings
are attacked, cotyledonary leaves turn to dull green colour, wither and die.
Necrosis of leaves starts from margins spreadingto interveinal areas and later to the entire
leaf. All lower leaves droop and dropoff. Subsequently plants die. Sometimes
superficial cracks are noticed onthe stem. Split open stems show brownish discolouration and
white cottony mycelia growth much prominently in the pith region. The fungus is seed borne.
Management
Select disease free seeds for planting. Rain water should not stand in field.
Rogue out and burn disease affected plants and crop debris regularly
Follow crop rotation for 2-3 years with non-host plants like pearl millet, finger millet
or other cereals. tolerant varieties-Jyoti, GCH4, Jwala
Follow intercropping with redgram
Seed treatment with Thiram@3g/kg seed.
Multiplication of 2 kg T. viride formulation by mixing in 50 kg FYM. Sprinkle water
and cover with polythene sheet for 15 days and then apply between rows of the crop.
Cultivate wilt resistant varieties, viz., Jyothi, Jwalaand hybrids, viz., DCH 32, DCH
177, DCH 519, GCH 4, GCH 5 and GCH 6.
Root rot/Charcoal rot-Macrophomina phaseolina
Symptoms
Sudden wilting of plants in patches under high soil moisture stress coupled with high soil
temperatures is a common symptom. Within a
week, the leaves and petiole droop down and within a fortnight the infected plants dry up.
Dark brown lesions are seen on the stem near the ground level. The taproot shows signs of
drying and root bark sheds off easily. Fruiting bodies (pycnidia) of the fungus are seen as
minute black dots on woody tissues and in pith region. In severe infection entire branch or
top of the branch withers away. Such branches die-back. Diseased plants flower prematurely.
Incidence atmaturity causes spike blight. Seed development is affected.
Management
Burn crop debris containing the sclerotia of the fungus.
Seed treatment with Trichoderma viride@4g/kg seed or carbendazim@1g/kg seed.
Crop rotation with cereals
Provide irrigation at critical stages of crop growth
Soil drenching with carbendazim@0.1%, 2-3 times at 15 days interval.
Grow tolerant and resistant varieties / hybrids like Jwala, GCH-4, and GCH-6.
Grey mold/Grey rot/Blossom blight-Botrytis ricini
Symptoms
Symptoms of the disease can be seen on leaves, stem, flowers and capsules, beingprominent
on spikes. Initially water soaked lesions form on the male flowers at the base ofthe spike.
These flowers rot and are covered by grey coloured fungal growth. Subsequently the disease
spreads upward infecting all flowers and capsuleswhich are covered by the fungus thereby
involving the entire spike. This is followed bydevelopment of cottony white growth which
later converts into grey colour due tosporulation. The infected capsules rot.
Management
Adjust sowing time in such a way that crop maturation occurs during dry season
Adopt wider spacing (90 x 60cm), Remove diseased spikes and destroy them
Grow varieties like Jwala with non-spiny capsules and less compact inflorescence.
Seed treatment with carbendazim@3g/kg
Spray carbendazim / Thiophanate methyl @0.1% before the onset of cyclonic rains
based on weather forecast followed by second spray soon after rains have receded.
Application of 20kg urea and 10kg of murate of potash after removal of diseased
panicles may be useful for the growth of panicles that subsequently develop.
LECTURE 24
DISEASES OF GINGELLY (SESAMUM INDICUM)
Alternaria leaf spot-Alternaria sesami
Symptoms
Initially small, circular, reddish brown spots (1-8mm) appear on leaves which enlargelater
and cover large area with concentric rings.The lower surface of the spots are grayish brown in
colour. In severe blighting defoliation occurs. Dark brown lesions can also beseen on
petioles, stem and capsules. Infection of capsules results in premature splittingwith shriveled
seeds.
Management
Resistant varieties-TC16, SI 156
Treat the seeds with Captan or Thiram@0.25%
Spray twice with Mancozeb@0.25% or Thiophanate methyl@0.25% orCarbendazim@0.1%
Powdery mildew-Leveillula taurica
Symptoms
Initially greyish-white powdery growth appears on the upper surface of leaves. Whenseveral
spots coalesce, the entire leaf surface may be covered with powdery coating. Insevere cases,
the infection may be seen on the flowers and young capsules, leading topremature shedding.
The severely affected leaves may be twisted and malformed. Seen in mid Aug when crop is
45-50 days old.
Management
Remove the infected plant debris and destroy.
Spray Wettable sulphur@0.2% or dust Sulphur at 25 kg/ha and repeat after 15 days.
Grow resistant varieties like Rajeshwari, SI-1926, KRR-2, etc.
Phyllody-Phytoplasma
Symptoms
The disease manifests itself mostly during flowering stage, where the floral parts
aretransformed into green leafy structures, which grow profusely. The plants bear cluster
ofleaves andmalformed flowers at the tip. The flower is rendered sterile. The plant is stunted
andabnormal branching gives a bushy appearance. The infected plants generally do not
bearcapsules, if formed they do not yield quality seeds.
Management
Remove all the reservoir and weed hosts.Delay sowing.
Resistant varieties-Rajeswari, chandana, hima,YLM66
Avoid growing sesamum near cotton, groundnut and grain legumes.
Rogue out the infected plants periodically.
Spray 2-3 times with Monocrotophos (0.03%) or Dimethoate@0.2% at flowering stage
reduces the vector population.
Root rot or stem rot or charcoal rot-Macrophomina phaseolina
Symptoms
The disease symptom starts as yellowing of lower leaves, followed by drooping
anddefoliation. The stem portion near the ground level shows dark brown lesions and bark
atthe collar region shows shredding. The sudden death of plants is seen in patches.The stem
portion can be easily pulled out leaving the rotten root portion in thesoil. The infection when
spreads to pods, they open prematurely and immature seedsbecome shrivelled and black in
colour.
Management
Treat the seeds with Trichoderma viride at 4g/kg or Pseudomonas fluorescens 10 g/kg
or treat the seeds with carbendazim@0.1% or Thiram at 4g/kg.
Apply FYM or green leaf manure at 10t/ha or neem cake 250 kg/ha.
Spot drench with Carbendazim at 0.5 g/liter.
Intercropping sesame with moth bean at 1:1 ratio is effective in managing the disease.
Soil solarization with transparent polythene mulch of 50μ for 6 weeks during hot
summer after ploughing and irrigation
Bacterial leaf spot-Pseudomonas sasami or Ralstonia syringae pv. sesami
Symptoms
The disease appears as watersoakedyellow specks on the upper surface of the leaves. They
enlarge and becomeangular as restricted by veins and veinlets.The colour of spot may be dark
brown topurple with shiny oozes of bacterial masses. Under high rainfall or high humid
conditionsspots coalesce and ultimately defoliation occurs.
Management
Keep the field free of infected plant debris.Seed treatment with hot water at 520C for 10
minutes.
Steep the seed in Agrimycin 100 (250 ppm) or streptocycline (0.055) for 30minutes.
Spray twice with Streptomycin sulphate or Oxy-tetracycline hydrochloride at 100g/ha
at 15 days interval.
LECTURE 25
DISEASES OF SUNFLOWER (HELIANTHUS ANNUUS)
Leaf blight-Alternaria helianthi
Symptoms
The fungus produces brown,circular to oval spots on the leaves, but the spots can also be
seenon thestem, sepals and petals. The spots are often surrounded by achlorotic zone with
necrotic center. The spots later enlarge in size with concentric ringsand become irregular in
shape. Under high atmospheric humidity, several spots coalesceto show bigger irregular
lesions leading to drying and defoliation. The disease sometimescause rotting of flower heads
and affects the quality of seeds by reducing the germinationpercentage.
Management
Remove and destroy infected plant debris.
Rogue out weeds at periodical intervals.
Treat the seeds with Thiram or Carbendazim at 3 g/kg.
Spray twice or thrice with zineb or Mancozeb at 0.2% or carbendazim@0.1% at 10
days interval starting from first appearance of the disease or 35 DAS.
Rust-Puccinia helianthi
Symptoms
Small, reddish brown pustules appear on the lowersurface of bottom leaves. Infection later
spreads to other leaves and even to the greenparts of the head. In severe infection
leavesbecome yellow and dry.
Management
Remove and burn the infected plant debris in the field.
Remove the volunteer sunflower plants.Crop rotation for 3 years
Grow tolerant variety like BSH-1.
Spray Mancozeb or Zineb@0.2%, 2-3 times at 10 days interval. The first spray should
be given as soon as the disease is noticed or 35 DAS.
Downy mildewPlasmopara halstedii
Symptoms
Various kinds of symptoms are being produced by the pathogen like damping off,systemic
infection, local lesions and basal rot or stem gall etc. In systemic infectionsplants are severely
stunted. Chlorosis starts through midribs causing ultimatelyabnormally thick, down ward
curled leaves that show prominent yellow and greenepiphyllous mottling. A hypophyllous
downy growth of the fungus develops.Flower heads of affected plants remain sterile. Local
foliar lesion symptoms arecharacterized by small angular greenish yellow spots on leaves.
Development of basal gallsymptoms occur independently of the infection that results in
systemic infection. In
infected plants flower heads are erect.
Management
Follow spacing of 60x30cm or 45x30cm,Rogue out infected plants and destroy
Cropping sequence of sunflower followed by groundnut reduces the disease.
Seed treatment with Metalaxyl@0.6% followed by foliar spray with
Metalaxyl@0.2% is effective.
Hybrids like LSH-1, LSH-3, KBSH-1, Jwalamukhi, etc had high degree of resistance.
Sclerotial wilt/Collar rot-Sclerotium rolfsii
Symptoms
Initial symptoms of the disease appear 40 days after sowing. Infected plants can be
spotted from a distance by their sickly appearance, later the entire plant withers and dies.
White cottony mycelium and mustard seed sized sclerotial bodies are formed on the
affected stem near soil level. Alternate periods of high soil moisture and water stress
conditions favor the disease.
Management
Collection and destruction of plant debris
Seed treatment with captan or carboxin@0.3%
Drench the base of the plant with cheshunt compound@0.3%
Addition of soil amendments like oat straw and finely grounded castor and neem cakes
reduces disease incidence.
Use of antagonistic fungi such as T. harzianum.
Lecture 26
Redgram
Wilt-Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. udum
Symptoms
The diseases may appear from early stages of plant growth (4-6 week old plant)
uptoflowering and podding. Patches of dead plants in the field when the crop is flowering
orpodding are the first indications of wilt. The most characteristic symptom is a purpleband
extending upwards from the base of the main stem. Vascular tissues exhibit
browndiscolouration in the region of purple band. Partial wilting of the plant associated with
infection of lateral roots is a definiteindication of Fusarium wilt and distinguishes from
Phytophthora blight that kills the whole plant due totap root infection.
Management
Follow crop rotation with tobacco, sorghum or castor. deep summer ploughing.
Avoid successive cultivation of redgram in the same field.
Adopt mixed cropping of sorghum in the field.
Avoid waterlogged soils.
Soil solarization in summer to reduce the inoculum of pathogen.
Collect and destroy the diseased stubbles.
Grow resistant / tolerant varieties like Asha (ICPL 87119), Maruti (ICP 8863),
Lakshmi (ICPL 85063), Durga (ICPL 84031), PRG 100, PRG 158, Muktha, Prabhat
and Sharada.
Seed treatment with Thiram @0.3% or Carbendazim @0.2%
Treat the seeds with Trichoderma viride at 4 g/kg.
Multiply 2 Kg T. viride formulation in 50 kg of FYM and apply to soil.
Phytophthora blight / Stem blight-Phytophthora drechsleri f. sp. cajani
Symptoms
Phytophthora blight resembles damping off in that it causes seedlings to die
suddenly.Infected plants have water soaked lesions on their leaves and brown to black,
slightlysunken lesions on their stems and petioles. Infected leaves loose turgidity, and
becomedesiccated. Lesions girdle the affected main stems or branches which break at this
pointand foliage above the lesion dries up. When conditions favour the pathogen, it is
commonfor many plants to die. Pigeonpea plants that are infected by blight, but not killed
oftenproduce large galls on their stems especially at the edges of the lesions. The
pathogeninfects the foliage and stems but not the root system.
Soils with poor drainage,low lying areas, heavy rain during July-September favours the
disease.Pigeonpeas are usually not infected after they are 60 days old.
Management
Avoid sowing redgram in fields with low-lying patches that are prone to water logging.
Adjust the sowing time so that crop growth should not coincide with heavy rainfall.
Grow resistant varieties like BDN 1, ICPL 150, ICPL 288, ICPL 304, KPBR 80-1-4.
Seed treatment with 4g Trichoderma viride formulation + 6g metalaxyl (Apron 35SD)per
kgseedSpray Metalaxyl (Ridomyl MZ) at 0.2%.
Sterility Mosaic-Sterility mosaic virus
Symptoms
The disease attack can be seen in all stages of crop growth. Plants appear as bushy, pale
green without flowers or pods. Leaves are small and show mosaic pattern, vein-clearing. In
severe cases, leaves become smaller andcluster near tip because of shortened internodes and
stimulation of auxillary buds. Theplants are generally stunted and do not produce pod. Plants
infected at early stages (upto45 days) show near complete sterility. Asplants become older
(after 45 days), their susceptibility to the disease decreases and suchplants show partial
sterility. If pods develop, the seeds may be small, shrivelled andimmature.
Management
Rogue out infected plants in early stages of disease development
Grow tolerant genotypes like ICPL 87119 (Asha), ICPL 227, Jagruti and Bahar
Spray Dicofol 3ml or Sulphur 3g in one liter of water to control mite vector in earlystages of
disease development
Bacterial leaf spot and stem canker-Xanthomonas campestris pv. cajani
Symptoms
Leaf infection can occur at all stages of plant growth, stem infection usually occurs in
younger plants. In India the disease usually appears in the rainy season during July
andAugust. It can be seen on lower leaves of plants that are about one month old as
smallnecrotic spotssurrounded by bright yellow halos. Later, rough, raised,
cankerouslesionsappear on the stem. Cankers can cause stemsto break, but the broken part
usually attaches to the plant. Stems often break at the pointwhere the primary leaves are
attached. Often, the affected plants do not break, and thestem cankers increase in size until
they are 15-25 cm long. In cases of severe infection theaffected branches dry.
Management
Remove the infected plant debris and destroy.
Spray antibiotics like Streptocycline@100ppm, 2-3 times at 10 days interval.
Lecture 27
BLACK GRAM (Vigna mungo)and GREEN GRAM (Vigna radiata)
Powdery mildew-Erysiphe polygoni
Symptoms
Small, irregular powdery spots appear on the upper surface of the leaves. These
spotsgradually increase in size and become circular covering the lower surface also. When
theinfection is severe, both surfaces of the leaf are completely covered by whitish
powderygrowth. In severe infections, foliage becomes yellow causing premature defoliation.
Thedisease becomes severe during flowering and pod development stage. The white
powderyspots completely cover the petioles, stem and even the pods. Often pods are
malformed and small with few ill-filled seeds. Thedisease causes forced maturity of infected
plants which results in heavy yield losses.
Management
Remove and destroy infected plant debris.
Spray twice with Carbendazim or Thiophanate methyl or Tridemorph @0.1%, one
immediately after disease appearance and the second after 15 days.
Grow tolerant black gram cultivar like Krishnayya,LBG623,TM962and green gram cultivars
like
JGUM 1, TARM 1, Pusa 9072, WGG 48 and WGG 62.
Rust-Uromyces phaseoli typica
Symptoms
The disease is mostly seen on leaves,rarely on petioles, stem and pods. The fungus produces
small, round, reddish brownuredosori mostly on lower surface. They may appear in groups
and several sori coalesceto cover a large area of the lamina. In the late season, teliosori
appear on the leaves whichare linear and dark brown in colour. Intense pustule formation
causes drying and sheddingof leaves.
Management
Remove and destroy the infected plant debris.
Spray Mancozeb@0.3% or Tridemorph@0.1% or Wettable sulfur@0.3%, immediatelyon the
set of disease and repeat after 15 days.
Grow tolerant black gram cultivar like LBG 648.
Cercospora leaf spot-Cercospora canescens
Symptoms
Small, circular spots develop on the leaves with grey centre and reddish brown margin.
The several spots coalesce to form brown irregular lesions. Under favourable
conditions, severe leaf spotting and defoliation occurs at the time offlowering and pod
formation. The brown lesions may be seen on petioles, branches andpods in severe cases.
Powdery growth of the fungus may be seen on the centre of thespots.
Management
Remove and burn infected plant debris.
Spray Mancozeb@0.25% or Carbendazim@0.1%
Grow tolerant black gram varieties like UG 135,TPU 4,TPU 5,TPU 11,TPU 12,AKU 4 and
SP 21.
Corynespora leaf spot-Corynespora cassicola
Symptoms
when the crop reaches flowering stage lesions begin asdark reddish brown circular
spotsusually on the upper leaf surface. They expandwith marked, narrow concentric
bandingto become larger spots. The concentric ringsare made up of dead tissue. In advanced
stages, the spots coalesce to form patches andshotholingand severe defoliation.Yields
decrease drastically.
Management
Remove and burn infected plant debris.
Spray Mancozeb@0.25% or Carbendazim@0.1%
Grow tolerant black gram varieties like LBG 167.
Dry root rot-Rhizoctonia bataticola
Symptoms
symptom starts with yellowing and drooping of the leaves. Theleaves later fall off and the
plant dies within week. Dark brown lesions are seen on thestem at ground level and bark
shows shredding symptom. The affected plants can beeasily pulled out leaving dried, rotten
root portions in the ground.
Management
Treat the seeds with Carbendazim or Thiram at 4 g/kg or pellet the seeds withTrichoderma
viride at 4 g/kg or Pseudonomas fluorescens @ 10g/kg of seed.
Apply FYM or green leaf manure (Gliricidia maculate) at 10 t/ha orneemcake at 250 kg/ha.
Bacterial leaf spot-Xanthomonas phaseoli
Symptoms
The spots first appearas superficial eruptions and gradually invade the tissues giving corky
or roughappearance. When the disease is severe spots coalesce and leaves turn yellow and
fall off
prematurely. The lower surface of the leaf appears red in colour due to the formation of
raised spots. The stem and pods also get infected.
Management
Grow tolerant green gram varieties like LGG 407, LGG 444, JAL 781, NDM 88-14
and ML 537.
Soak the seed in 500 ppm streptocycline solution for 30 minutes before sowing.
Spray twice with paushamycin or plantomycin 100 mg in combination with 3 g of
COC per liter at an interval of 12 days.
Yellow mosaic-Mungbean yellow mosaic virus
Symptoms
Initially small yellow patches or spots appear on young leaves. The next trifoliate leaves
emerging from the growing apex show irregular yellow and green patches alternating with
each other. The yellow discoloration slowly increases and newly formed leaves may
completely turn yellow. Infected leaves also show necrotic symptoms. The infected plants
normally mature late and bear a very few flowers and pods. The pods are small and
distorted. The early infection causes death of the plant before seed set.
Management
Rogue out the diseased plants upto 40 DAS
Remove the weed hosts periodically.
Increase the seed rate (25 kg/ha).
Grow resistant black gram varieties like Teja,T-9, PU31, LBG 752, Pant-30 and Pant-90.
Grow resistant green gram varieties like LGG 407,LGG 460,WGG37 and ML 267.
Cultivate the crop during rabi season.
Follow mixed cropping by growing two rows of maize (60 x 30 cm) or sorghum (45 x15 cm)
for every 15 rows of black gram or green gram.
Grow seven rows of sorghum as border crop
Treat seeds with Imidacloprid 70 WS @ 5ml/kg to control vector(whitefly).
Give one foliar spray of systemic insecticide (Dimethoate @ 750 ml/ha) on 30 DAS.
Lecture 28
BENGAL GRAM (Cicer arietinum)
Wilt-Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. ciceri
Symptoms
The disease occurs at two stages of crop growth, seedling stage and flowering stage. The field
symptoms of wilt are death of seedlings or adult plants in patches.Seedlings collapse and lie
flat on the ground retaining their dull green colour. When splitopen or cut transversely, brown
to black discolouration of the internal tissues can be seen.Grown up plants show typical
symptoms of wilting, i.e., drooping of petioles, rachis andleaflets. All the leaves turn yellow
and then light brown. Vascular discolourationisobserved on longitudinal splitting of stem.
Sometimes only a few branches are affected,resulting in partial wilt.
Management
Treat the seeds with Carbendazim or Thiram at 2 g/kg or treat the seeds withTrichoderma
viride at 4 g/kg or Pseudonomas fluorescens @ 10g/kg of seed.
Apply heavy doses of organic manure or green manure.Follow 6-year crop rotation with non-
host crops.Grow resistant cultures like Kranthi(ICCC 37), Swetha(ICCV-2), ICCV
10,Avrodhi, G 24, C 214, BG 244, Pusa 212 and JG 315.
Ascochyta blight-Ascochyta rabiei
Symptoms
The disease is usually seen aroundflowering and podding time as patches of blighted plants in
the field. On leaves, smallwater-soaked necrotic spots appear that enlarge rapidly under
favourable conditionsleading to blighting of leaves. Pycnidia are observed on the blighted
parts. On leaflets, the lesions are round or elongated, with grey centres surrounded
bybrownish margin. similar spots on the stemand pods have pycnidia arranged in concentric
circles as minute black dots. The stemand petioles usually break at the point of infection due
to girdling. If the main stem isgirdled at the collar region, the whole plant dies.
Management
Grow resistant/tolerant varieties like Gaurav, C 235, G 543, GG 588, GG 688, BG 261
and GNJ 214.
Remove and destroy the infected plant debris in the field.
Follow crop rotation with cereals.
Deep sowing of seeds, i.e., 15cm or deeper.
Intercropping with wheat, barley and mustard.
Treat the seeds with Thiram 2g or Carbendazim 2 g /kg.
Exposure of seed at 40-50 C reduced the survival of A. rabiei by about 40-70 per cent.
0
Spray with Carbendazim@0.1% or Chlorothalonil@0.3%.
Lecture 29,30,31
CITRUS
1) Gummosis: Phytophthora palmivora
Symptoms
Disease starts as water soaked large patches on the basal portions of the stem nearthe ground
level.First symptoms are dark staining of bark which progresses into the wood.Bark in such
parts dries, cracksin lengthwise verticalstrips.Bark at the base is destroyed resulting in
girdling and finally death of the tree.Later profuse exudation of gum from the bark of the
trunk occurs. Infection extends to crown roots.Prior to death, plant usually blossoms heavily
and dies before the fruitsmature. more in heavy soils with improper drainage, frequent
irrigations, standing water at base of trunk
Management
Preventive measures:
Selection of proper site with adequate drainage and high budding (30 to 46 cm orabove).
Double ring method of irrigation.
Avoid irrigation water from coming in direct contact with the trunk.
Avoid injuries to crown roots or base of stem during cultural operations.
Use resistant sour orange rootstocks for propagating economic varieties(jambheri)
Painting Bordeaux paste or with ZnSO4, CuSO4, lime (5:1:4) to a height of about
60 cm above the ground level at least once a year.
Curative measures:
Scrape the diseased portion with a sharp knife.
Protect the cut surface with Bordeaux paste followed by spraying of Bavistin 1g/l reduces the
spread.
Soil drenching with 0.2% metalaxyl and 0.5% Trichoderma viride commercial
formulation is also effective.
2) Tristeza or quick decline: Citrus Tristeza Virus (CTV)
Symptoms:Tristeza affected trees look chlorotic and sickly in the early stages. Gradually
theleaves drop and the defoliated twigs show die-back. such trees diegradually butsometimes
healthy trees die suddenly.Vein clearing in young leaves of acidlime is seen when viewed
against light (characteristic symptom).In sweet orange, the specific symptom is
honeycombing, fine pits on bark in the portion of trunk below the bud union. Diseased trees
usually blossom heavily. Trees with stem pitting are stunted andset less fruits. The fruits are
of smaller size and of poor quality. Asthe fruits develop, the tree wilts partly or completely.It
is transmitted by the aphid and cuscuta. The virus is not seedborne.
Management:
For A.P, Maharashtra and Karnataka, Rangapur lime isrecommended as a root stock
resistant to Tristeza. Periodic sprays of insecticides like Monocrotophos 0.05 % reduce s
thesecondary spread of the disease in the orchard.
Citrus canker: Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. citri
Acid lime is highly susceptible to canker.
Symptoms:
symptoms are most conspicuous on leaves, twigs and fruits. The lesions appear as minute
water soaked round, yellow spots which enlarge slightly and turn brown, eruptive and
corky.Canker lesions on the fruit do not possess the yellow halo as on leaves. Several lesions
on fruit may coalesce to form a patch. The market value of the fruits is reduced by the canker
spots. In severe infection defoliation and die-back symptoms seen. Citrus leaf miners
(Phyllocnistis citrella) helps in the dissemination of the pathogen. Spread by rain splashes.
Management
Prune out and burn all canker infected twigs before monsoon
Use canker tolerant varieties like “Tenali selection” and “Balaji”
Select seedlings free from canker for planting in main field
Spray Streptocycline (1g) + Copper oxy chloride (30g) in 10 litres of water in citrus nurseries
and in main fieldfor leaf canker &Fruit infection
Control leaf miner when young flush is produced.
Zinc deficiency: More in alkaline soils. Symptoms seen in young leaves. Interveinal
chlorosis, reduction in leaf size, reduction in length of branches, drying of branches also.
Young leaves become bushy and erect. If soil PH is >6.0 zinc in the soil becomes unavailable
to plants. Therefore application of zinc to such soils is not of use. Spray 0.2% ZnSo4 on
young leaves. Ziram 0.2% also can be used to correct deficiency.
Iron deficiency: small veins in the leaf remain green and leaves turn yellow/white.No
reduction in leaf size. Iron deficiency is seen if calcium is more in soil and in high
P,Zn,Cu,Mn conditions.Spray Annabhedi 0.25%+0.1%citric acid to correct iron deficiency.
LECTURE 32
Mango
1. Powdery mildew: Oidium mangiferae (Eyrsiphe polygoni)
Symptoms:
Generally the infection recognized by whitish or grayish powdery growth starts from the
inflorescence and spreads downwardscovering the floral axis, tender leaves and stem. Leaves
become twistedand defoliate.Infected floral parts are severely damaged and drop off. If the fruits
are set, theydo not grow in size and may drop before attaining pea size. Fruits are
sometimesmalformed, discolored due to severeattack.cloudy weather,high humidity, low night
temperature spread disease. Air dispersal.
Management
Can be controlled with two preventive sprays with wettable sulphur 0.3% once beforethe flowers
open and 2 after the fruit set.
nd
Dusting twice or thrice with fine sulphur will check the disease.
Spraying with Karathane 0.1% before flowering and after fruit set(peanut stage).
Resistant varieties: Neelum, Zardalu, Banglora, Torapari-khurd and Janardhan pasand
DISEASES OF GRAPE
1. Powdery mildew: Uncinula necator (I.S: Oidium tuckeri)
Symptoms
Early berry infection results in shedding of affected berries.Powdery growth is visible on
older berries and the infection results in the cracking of skin of the berries. Floral infection
results in shedding of flowers and poor fruit set.Powdery growth on both surface of the
leaves- curling. Management
Clean cultivation of vines or removal and destruction of all diseased parts
Spray wettable sulphur @0.3% or karathane or calixin @0.1%
Downy mildew: Plasmopara viticola
Symptoms
Irregular, yellowish, translucent spots on the upper surface of the leaves correspondingly on
the lower surface, dirty white, powdery growth of fungus appears.Premature
defoliation.Dwarfing of tender shoots.hite growth of fungus on berries which subsequently
becomes leathery and
shrivels. Infected berries turn hard, bluish green and then brown. Later infection of berries
results in soft rot symptoms. Normally, the fully grown or maturing berries do not contact
fresh infection as stomata turn non-functional. No cracking of the skin of the berries.
Optimum temperature : 20-22°C,Relative humidity : 80-100 per cent
Management
Collect and burn fallen leaves and twigs
Sanitation of the orchard
Vine should be kept high above ground to allow circulation of air by proper spacing
Pruning (April- may & Sep- Oct) and burning of infected twigs
Grow resistant varieties like Amber Queen, Champa, Champion, Red Sultana
The disease can be effectively managed by giving 3-5 prophylactic sprays with 1%
B.M or metalaxyl + mancozeb 0.3 to 0.4% or Azoxystrobin
Anthracnose / Birds eye disease: Elsinoe ampelina
It is especially serious on new sprouts during rainy season. Occur from June to October
Symptoms
Young shoots and fruits are more susceptible than leaves. Circular, greyish black spots or red
spots with yellow halo appear.Later the centre of the spot becomes grey, sunken and fall off
resulting in ‘shot hole’. Black, sunken lesions appear on young shoots.Cankerous lesions on
older shoots. Girdling and death of shoots occur.Infection on the stalk of bunches and berries
result in the shedding of bunches and berries respectively. Sunken spots with ashy grey centre
and dark margin on fruits (Birds eye symptom). Mummification and shedding of berries.
No infection can take place in the absence of rain. Wind associated with warm atmosphere
(temp.) and heavy rains favour the disease spread. More in Low lying and badly drained soils.
Anab-e-shahi is susceptible.
Management
Removal of infected twigs
Selection of cuttings from disease free areas and dipping them in 3% FeSO
4
solution for ½ an hour before planting.
Spraying Bordeaux mixture 1% or COC@ 0.2% or carbendazim@0.1%.
Lecture33
DISEASES OF GUAVA
1. Wilt – Fusaium oxysporum f.sp. psidii, Macrophomina phaseolina,
Cephalosporium sp., Gliocladium roseum and Verticillium alboarum.
Symptoms
The affected plants show yellow colouration with slight leaf curling at the terminalbranches,
becoming reddish at the later stage and subsequently premature sheddingof leaves. Twigs
become bare and fail to bring forth new leaves or flowers and eventually dryup. Fruits of all
the affected branches remain underdeveloped, become hard, blackand stony. A few plants
also show partialwilting, which is very common symptom of wilt. The finer roots show black
streaks which become prominent on removing the bark. The roots also show rotting at the
basal region and the bark is easily detachablefrom the cortex.Bark splitting can be seenin
wilted plants in later stages.The disease can be categorized into slow wilt and sudden wilt. In
slow wilt, planttakes several months or even a year, to wilt after the appearance of
initialsymptoms and in sudden wilt, infected plant wilts in 15 days to one month.
Management
Proper sanitation of orchard.
Wilted plants should be uprooted, burnt and a trench of 1.0-1.5m should be dugaround the
tunk. Treat the pits with formalin and cover the pit for three daysand then transplant the
seedlings after two weeks.
While transplanting seedlings avoid damage to the roots.
Maintain proper tree vigour by timely and adequate manuring, inter-culture andirrigation.
Intercropping with turmeric or marigld.
Soil solariztion with transparent polythene sheet during summer months.
Application of oil cakes like neem cake, mahua cake, kusum cake supplementedwith urea.
Apply 6kg neem cake + 2kg gypsum per plant.
Judicous ammendments of N and Zn.
Resistant variety: Apple guava
Drench with 0.2% Benomyl or Carbendazim, four times a year and spray twice
with Measystox and Zinc sulphate.
Disinfestation of soil with Metam-sodium at 252 ml/10m2 area to controlnematodes.
Lecture 34
DISEASES OF PAPAYA
1. Powdery mildew: Oidium caricae
Symptoms
white mycelium develops on both the leaf surfaces. Lesioned areas become chlorotic and
sometimes surrounded by a dark margin. Flower stalks and fruits are also affected.Stems of
young seedlings are affected when grown under reduced light conditions.Severe attack leads
to death of top portion of the seedlings
Management
Spray wettable Sulphur@0.3% at 10 days interval
Spray systemic fungicides like Bayleton@0.1% or carbendazim@0.1% at monthly
intervals
2. Foot rot / stem rot: Pythium aphanidermatum, Rhizoctonia solani
Symptoms
Water soaked patches on the stem at the ground level.Patches enlarge and girdle the base of
the stem.Diseased tissues turn brown or black and rot.Terminal leaves turn yellow, droop and
wilt
Fruits shrivel and drop off.Entire plant topples over and dies.Internal tissues of bark appear
dry and give honey comb appearance.Roots deteriorate and may be destroyed
Management
Seedlings should be raised in well drained nursery area
Uproot the diseased seedlings and burn
ST with captan@4g/kg seed or chlorothalonil@2g/kg seed (R. solani)
Drench the base of stem with COC@0.25% or metalaxyl@0.1% or Bordeaux
mixture@1.2%
3. Mosaic: Papaya mosaic virus or Papaya ringspot virus or Carica virus1
Symptoms
Mottlingand puckering of leaves, especially the young ones. The lamina is reduced and
malformed and are often modified into tendril likestructures. Older leaves fall down and a
small tuft of younger leaves is left at the top withupright postion. The stem, petiole and fruits
develop elongated water soaked areas showingconcentric or circular rings.Fruit size is
severely reduced with deformed shape. Aphids spread the disease
Management
Disease free seedlings, Rouging and destruction of diseased plants
Vector control, Carica cauliflora is resistant
Weekly sprays with 1% groundnut oil
4. Leaf curl: Tobacco leaf curl virus or Nicotiana virus 10
Symptoms
Severe curling of leaves accompanied by vein clearingand reduction of leaf lamina.Leaf
margins are rolled inward in the form of inverted cup.Leaves become leathery, brittle and
petioles are twisted.Diseased plants fail to flower or bear fruits.In advanced stage, defoliation
and growth is arrested. Whitefly, Bamesia tabaci and grafting spread virus
Management
Disease free seedlings, Rouging and destruction of diseased plants
Vector control with monochrotophos@0.05% or Dimethoate@0.2% or
metasystox@0.1%
LECTURE 35 &36
DISEASES OF BANANA
1) Yellow Sigatoka leaf spot - Mycosphaerella musicola Black sigatoka – Mycosphaerella
fijiensis
Symptoms
Small spindle shaped spots with greyish centre and yellowish halorunning parallel to veins
ofyoung leaves.Spots coalesce and whole leaf blade dries up.On the upper surface of the
spots, fructifications of the fungus appear as blackspecks.If the fruit is nearing maturity at the
time of heavy infection, the flesh ripensunevenly and individual bananas appear undersized
and their flesh develops a buffpinkish colour, and store poorly.
Management
Removal and destruction of affected leaves followed by spraying with BM (1%) +linseed oil
(2%).crop rotation with maize, vegetables once after 3 seasons. spacing 2.5m between rows
and plants.
Prevent water accumulation around the plant and go for periodical weeding.
Spray chlorothalonil@0.2% or carbendazim or thiophanate methyl@0.1%
ormancozeb@0.25% along with spreading agent such as teepol orsandovit added at the rate
of 1ml/lit of water.
2) Moko disease / Bacterial wilt-Ralstonia solanacearum (Pseudomonas or Burkholderia)
Symptoms
Symptoms start on rapidly growing young plants.The youngest three to four leaves turn pale
green or yellow and collapse near thejunction of lamina and petiole.Characteristic
discoloration of vascular strands, wilting and blackening of suckers.Vascular discolouration
is concentratednear the centre of the pseudostem. Greyish brown bacterial ooze is seen when
the affected pseudostem is cut transversely.A firm brown dry rotwithin fruits
(characteristicsymptom)
Management
Grow resistant varieties like poovan and monthan.
Use of healthy planting material.
Exposure of soil to sunlight during dry hot weather.
Eradicate infected plants and suckers killing in situ by application of herbicides.
Disinfestation of tools with formaldehyde diluted with water in 1:3 ratio.
Crop rotation (3 years rotation with sugarcane or rice) & providing good drainage
Allow fallow period or flooding during off-season
Fumigation of infected site with Methyl Bromide or chloropicrin.
Spray systemic insecticide to prevent transmission of disease to healthy plants.
3) Banana Mosaic / Infectious chlorosis/ Heart rot: Cucumber mosaic virus
Symptoms
Typical mosaic-like or discontinuous linear streaking in bands extending frommargin to
midrib.
Leaf size is reduced and leaves are malformed.Chlorosis of newly formed leaves.In severe
cases rotting of heart leaf and leaf sheaths which progressinto the pseudostem and plant dies.
Diseased plants do not reach maturity
Management
Use of disease free suckers for planting, Dry heat treatment of suckers at 400C for 1 day
Avoid growing cucurbits as intercrop
Vector control with Methyl demeton or dimethoate@ 0.2% at 3 – 4 weeks interval
Panama wilt- Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. cubense
Symptoms
Symptoms usually appear on atleast 5 months old banana plants.The earliest symptoms are
faint yellow streaks on the petiole of oldest leaves that show progressive yellowing, break at
the petiole and hang down along the pseudostem. Heart leaf alone remains upright.Varying
degrees of longitudinal splitting along pseudostem are often observed. vascular
discolouration of pseudostem appears first in the outer or oldest leaf sheath and extends upto
the pseudostem. The fungus grows and blocks the vascular system resulting in wilting of the
plant.Affected plants give characteristic odour of rotten fish.Affected plants do not produce
bunches. Even if produced, fruits are malformedand ripen prematurely or irregularly.
Poorly drained soils, acidic, light textured soils and plants with Insect injuries, wounds and
infestation of burrowing nematode, Radopholus similis, have greater incidence.
Spread as conidia through irrigation water or through root contact
Management
Use of disease free suckers for planting.
Avoid ill drained soils, and prefer slightly alkaline soils (7-7.5 pH) for cultivation
Flood fallowing for 6 to 24 months or crop rotation with rice.
Application of lime (1-2 kg/pit) to the infected pits after chopping of the plants parts.
Dipping of suckers in carbendazim (0.1%) solution before planting
Soil drench with 0.1% carbendazim or 0.01% Vapam(8.5g/l)
Growing resistant Cavendish varieties, viz., Basrai (Vamanakeli), Poovan
(Karpura chakkarakeli) between June-August
Bunchy top disease-Bunchy top virus
Symptoms
Prominent dark green streaks on the petioles and midrib along the leaf veins.Marginal
chlorosis and curling of leaves.Petioles fail to elongate. Leaves are reduced in size, chlorotic,
stand upright and become brittle and are crowded at the top (Bunchy top) and show dark
green streaks near the midrib.Flowers display mottled and streaked discolouration. Plants
show marked stunting
Management
Eradication of all infected suckers by spraying with kerosene or by injecting
herbicide, 2, 4-D
Use of only certified banana suckers for planting
The new crop should be regularly inspected and the diseased plants destroyed as
soon as noticed.
Vector (Banana aphid, Pentalonia nigronervosa) control with systemic insecticides, Viz.,
Phosphomidon @ 1ml/lt or Methyl demeton 2ml/l
Lecture 37&38
DISEASES OF POMEGRANATE
1) Cercospora leaf spot – Cercospora punicae
Symptoms
Light zonate brown spots appear on the leaves and fruits.Black and elliptic spots appear on
the twigs.The affected areas in the twigs become flattened and depressed with raised
edge.Such infected twigs dry up.In severe cases the whole plant dies.
Management
Pruning and destruction of diseased twigs.
Application of thiophanate- methyl 0.1% or chlorothalonil 0.2% or mancozeb 0.2%
2) Anthracnose – Colletotrichum gloeosporioides
Symptoms
Small, regular to irregular dull violet or black spots surrounded by yellow margins on the
leaves.Infected leaves turn yellow and drop off.Small irregular lesions on the fruit reduce
market value
Management
Spray carbendazim@0.1% or Thiophanate-methyl @0.1% or mancozeb@0.2% fortnightly
3) Bacterial leaf spot - Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. punicae
Symptoms
Small irregular water soaked deep red spots on leaves.Leaves distorted and malformed. On
the stem, the disease starts as brown to black spots around the nodes.Girdling and cracking of
nodes.Branches break down. Brown to black spots on the pericarp of fruit with L or Y shaped
cracks
Management
Clean cultivation and strict sanitation in orchard
Spray B.M @1% along with antibiotic
LECTURE 39 & 40
DISEASES OF CHILLI
1) Damping off – Pythium aphanidermatum,
Symptoms
Pre-emergence damping off: Seedlings disintegrate before they come out of soilsurface which
results in poor fieldemergence / poor seed germination.
Post-emergence damping off :Development of disease afterseedlings have emerged out of
soil surface but before the stems are lignified.
Lesion formation at collar region.Infected areas appear brown and water soaked.Plants
shrivel and collapse as a result of softening of tissues.Infected stems become hard, thin and
infected seedlingstopple. Disease appear in patches both in nursery and field beds.
Management
Raise nursery in light soil with proper drainage
Burning farm trash on the surface of the beds.
Sowing seed on raised beds of 6-8” high (15cm)
Crop rotation, avoid use of undecomposed FYM
Using low seed rate of 650 g/cent.
Seed dressing with Thiram or captan @ 3 g/Kg.
Soil drenching with metalaxyl@0.2%
2) Die-back and fruit rot – Colletotrichum capsici
Symptoms
December - October in transplanted crop
Infection of growing tips leads to necrosis of branches from tip backwards
Shedding of flowers due to the infection at pedicel and tips of branches
Fruit symptoms
Ripe fruits are more liable for attack than the green ones.Small, circular, yellowish to pinkish
sunken spots appear on fruits later attain elliptical shape.Severe infection result in the
shrivelling and drying of fruits that become white or greyish and lose their pungency.The
affected fruits may fall off subsequently. spread by air and seeds.
Management
Collect and destroy all infected plant parts
Collect seeds only from fruits without infection
Removal and destruction of Solanaceous weed hosts and infected plant debris
Seed treatment with captan or Thiram 3-4g/kg
Spray thrice with propiconazole2ml/l or mancozeb@0.25%. just before flowering, at
fruit formation stage and 15 days after second spray.
3) Powdery mildew – Leveillula taurica
Usually seen from December - February
Symptoms
White powdery coating appears mostly on the lower surface andcorrespondingly on the upper
surface yellow patches are seen.Sometimes the powdery coating can also be seen on the
upper leaf surface, young fruits and branches.Severe infection results in the drying and
shedding of affected leaves&flowers.Diseased fruits do not grow further and may drop down.
Management
Spraying wettable S@0.3% or Dinocap or Carbendazim or Tridemorph 0.1%.
4) Bacterial leaf spot: Xanthomoas campestris pv. vesicatoria
Symptoms
Lesions on leaf begin as circular, water soaked spots and become necrotic with brown center
and chlorotic borders.Lesions are slightly raised on lower leaf surface.Severely spotted leaves
turn yellow and drop.Raised brown lesions appear on fruits.Narrow elongated lesions or
streaks may develop on stems. High humidity during July-Sep, 22-340C favor disease
Management
Seeds should be collected from healthy fruits,
Seed treatment with copper oxychloride 2g/kg seed.
Spray twice with plantomycin (200ppm) along with 3gCOC per litre of water at 15 days
interval
Lecture 41
DISEASES OF BHENDI
1) Yellow vein mosaic: Bhendi Yellow vein mosaic virus or bhendi vein clearingvirus
Symptoms
Yellowing of veins in the leaf (vein clearing) is thecharacteristic symptom. In severe
infections the younger leaves turn yellow,become reduced in size and the plant is highly
stunted.Infection restricts flowering and fruits are not formed, if formed, turns smaller,harder
and rough. Loss in fruit yield ranges from 50-100% based on diseaseincidence. More in
rainfed crop. Spread by whitefly& jassid
Management
Tolerant varieties: Parbhani Kranti, Pusa savani, Janardhan, Haritha, ArkaAnamika and Arka
Abhay.Destroy wild plants/weeds on which virus survives
The disease spread can be restricted by spraying Monocrotophos, 1.5 ml/l.
2) Powdery mildew: Erysiphe cichoracearum
Symptoms
Grayish powdery growth occurs on the under as well as on the upper surface of theleaf,
yellowing of leaves, flower drop causing severe reduction in fruit yield.More during Nov-
Mar.
Management
spray wettable sulphur@0.3% orDinocap@0.1% , three to four times at 15 days intervals.
Brinjal
Phomopsis fruit rot or blight – Phomopsis vexans
Symptoms
The plants are attacked at all stages of growth, producing damping-off symptoms
in nurseries and collar rot on young plants.On leaves, circular to irregular, clearly defined
grayish brown spots having lightcenters appear. The diseased leaves become yellowish in
colour and may drop off.Several black pycnidia can be seen on older spots.The lesions on
stem are dark brown, round to oval and have grayish centers wherepycnidia develop. At the
base of the stem, the fungus causes characteristicconstrictions leading to canker development
and toppling of plants.On fruits, small pale sunken spots appear which on enlargement cover
entire fruitsurface. These spots become watery leading to soft rot phase of the disease. dry rot
and black mummified fruits. Pathogen is seed borne and also survives in plant debris as
mycelium andpycnidia. Conidia dispersed through rain splashes, irrigation water, agricultural
tools andinsects.
High relative humidity coupled with higher temperatures favour diseasedevelopment.
260C,55% R.H.
Management
Removal and destruction of diseased crop debris
Practicing crop rotation and summer ploughings helps in reducing initial inoculmn.
Use of disease free seed
Hot water treatment of seed at 500C for 30 minutes
Seed treatment with thiophanate methyl at 1g/kg seed
Spray twice with thiophanate methyl or carbendazim@0.1% at 20 days interval.
Lecture 42
DISEASES OF CUCURBITS
1) Downy mildew – Pseudoperonospora cubensis
Symptoms
Yellow, angular spots appear on upper surface of leaves.The corresponding lower surface of
these spots shows a purplish downy growth in moist weather.The spots turn necrotic with age
The diseased leaves become yellow and fall down.Diseased plants get stunted and die
Fruits produced may not mature and have a poor taste
Management
Destruction of cucurbitaceous weeds around field
Spray metalaxyl@0.2% or chlorothalonil@0.2%
Spray zineb@0.3% at 10 days interval
2) Powdery mildew: Erysiphe cichoracearum, Sphaerotheca fuligena
Symptoms
Whitish powdery growth on foliage, stems and young growing parts.premature defoliation
and
death. Fruits remain undeveloped and are deformed
Management
Spray Calixin 0.1% or Karathane @0.2%
LECTURE 43& 44
DISEASES OF TOMATO
1) Early blight – Alternaria solani
Symptoms
Lowest leaves are attacked first and the disease progresses upwards. Small, isolated, scattered
pale brown spots on the leaf.Fully developed spots are irregular, brown withconcentric rings
inside the spot.Spots coalesce to form large patches resulting in the leaf blight.In severe
attacks the entire plant may be defoliated.
Zonate lesions may also develop on stems and petioles, which break at the point of
Infection.Brown spots are also seen on calyx.Slightly dark, sunken, round to irregular lesions
on fruit at the calyx end
Management
Maintain proper vigour of the plant, Use of disease free seed
Removal and burning of diseased crop debris
Mancozeb@0.25% or chlorothalonil@0.2% or Zineb@ 0.25% spray at weeklyintervals
2) Tomato Mosaic – Tomato mosaic virus
Symptoms
The virus causes a light and dark green mosaic mottle with raised dark green areaand
distorted to a fan leaf or tendril likeyounger leaves. The plants are stunted. Some strains
causeyellowing or leaf mottling which may also affect the fruit.Some other strains produce
longitudinal necroticstreaks on stem or petioles. Such diseased plants are killed. Necrotic
sunken lesions also appear on fruits and sometimes internal necrosis orbrowning of mature
fruit occurs.
Management
All collateral hosts in the vicinity should be destroyed before planting new crop
Rouge out and destroy diseased plants
Virus free seed should be obtained and used for sowing
Soak the seeds in 10% Tri-sodium orthophosphate for 15 to 20 minutes prior tosowing
Heat treatment for 2-4 days at 700C
Cross protection of tomato seedlings by inoculating with mild strains
Field workers should avoid using tobacco products while working in the field
3) Bacterial fruit canker: Clavibacter michiganense subsp. michiganense
Symptoms
Disease appears as spots on leaves, stems and fruits and as wilting of leaves andshoots.
White blister like spots in the margins of leaves that become brown with age and coalesce,
but do not fall off.Light coloured streaks on stems and petioles at the joints.Cracks develop in
streaks and form cankers.Slimy bacterial ooze through the cracks in humid weather.Birds eye
likeappearance of spots, which have brownish centers and white halos.Vascular
discolouration.
Large cavities in pith and cortex which extend to outer surface of stem and causecankers
Management
Extraction of seed through fermentation of pulp at room temperature for 72 hourseradicates
the bacterium from the seed.
Hot water treatment of seed at 520
Protective sprays with COC and streptomycin sulphate
Three year crop rotation, Soil solarization
4) Root knot nematode – Meloidogyne sp.
Symptoms
Formation of galls on host root system. Roots branch profusely starting from the gall tissue
causing a ‘beard root’symptom.In severely infected plants the root system is reduced and the
rootlets are almostcompletely absent. Uptakeand transport of water and nutrients hampered.
Plants wilt during the hot part of day, especially under dry conditions and are
oftenstunted.Seedlings infected in nursery do not normally survive transplanting and
thosesurviving have reduced flowering and fruit production
Management
Crop rotation with graminaceous hosts
Inclusion of non-preferred hosts like mustard, sesame, maize, wheat, etc., in thecropping
system
Intercropping of marigold with tomato reduces nematode population
Nursery should be raised in nematode free sites or fumigated beds
Deep ploughing of infested fields during summer. Three summer ploughings at 10days
interval reduces juvenile population
Flooding the field for prolonged periods
Use of biocontrol agents like Paecilomyces lilacinus (egg parasite)
Nursery bed treatment with metham sodium (Vapam)@25ml/m2orCarbofuran@0.39g a.i/m
2
Bare root dip treatment in EC formulation of systemic pesticides like Dimethoate
or Phenemiphos for 6-8 hours before transplantation
Grow resistant varieties like Hissar Lalit and PNR-7
Integration of three summer ploughings or use of treated nursery with spotapplication of
carbofuran @1 kg a.i/ha at transplanting stage.
LECTURE 45
DISEASES OF COCONUT
1) Ganoderma basal stem rot– Ganoderma lucidum, G.applanatum
Symptoms
The fungus infects the roots and spreads upwards killing the entire root system.Older leaves
droop and wither and remain suspended around the trunk for severalmonths. Tree become
barren due to suppression of inflorescence.Diseased tree dies slowly in about two years and
often the stem cracks, giving out a dark brown ooze. Extensive rotting of roots and peeling of
stem tissues. Droping of buds and nuts also.More in light soils. Weather conditions from
Nov-June favor spread of disease.
Management
Preventive measures
Dig isolation trenches of about 50cm wide and 1m deep, 2-3 m away from diseasedpalm to
prevent spread of fungus
Trenches dug for replanting should be filled with FYM, 5kg neem cake andTrichoderma
viride
Incorporate green manure crops like sunhemp and Sesbania for moisture retentionand
multiplication of antagonistic fungi
Avoid deep ploughing or digging which are likely to injure roots
Arrange separate irrigation to each tree to prevent spread of fungus
Apply FYM (200 kg) and neem cake (5-10 kg) to each tree during June – July
Also apply 2 kg superphosphate and 3 kg MOP in two splits, one in July and other
in November
Apply 40 liters of 1% BM in basin of each tree, yearly once, during August –September
Curative measures
Destroy infected palms
Root feeding with tridemorph (6ml in 25 ml of water), 3-4 times an year, in earlystages of
infection, Control bark eating caterpiller
2) Bud rot - Phytophthora palmivora
Symptoms
Severe on young palms upto 25yrs old.Yellowish green discoloration of the crown leaf. The
basal tissues of the leaf rot quickly and can be easily separated from the crown.Spindle
withers and droop down.Older leaves develop irregular, water soaked spots which are sunken
in nature.The leaves and sheath in the central spindle fall off leaving an outer whorl of green
leaves. The withered central shoot can be pulled out very easily from the crown. The central
crown may rot and in few months the tree may wilt. Young nuts fail to mature and fall.Severe
in waterlogging areas and closely spaced plants. Attack in rainy season.
Management
Cutting and burning of badly infected palms. Adopt 8m spacing. Provide drainage channels.
If the disease is detected early remove the infected portions and protect withBordeaux
pasteSpray copper fungicides (B.M@1% or COC@0.3%) after onset of monsoon toprevent
infection
Keep a mixture of CuSO + NaCl (1: 3-5) parts in a cloth bag in the crown orabove bud
4
3) Stem bleeding – Ceratocystis paradoxa
Symptoms
Reddish brown ooze from the cracks near the base of the trunk.The fluid dries up to form
black encrustations.The tissues, except vascular bundles, below infected patch show
yellowish browndiscolouration and decay.Large cavities are formed in diseased stemfrom
which yellowish to whitish fluidoozes out.Excess moisture, high PH or alkalinity in soil favor
disease occurrence. Spread is more in young palms
Management
Avoid any mechanical injury to the stem.Cover the lower part of trunk with coal tar or
Bordeaux paste to prevent the disease.
Chisel out affected tissues and dress the wound with hot coal tar or Bordeauxpaste
Apply 5 kg neem cake containing Trichoderma along with 50kg of organic manure to the
basin during September
LECTURE 46
DISEASES OF ROSE
1) Powdery mildew – Sphaerotheca pannosa var. rosae
Symptoms
The infected leaves show grayish powdery fungal growth.Rolling of leaf margins with the
onset of sprouting season.Affected leaves become curled and distorted.Badly infected flower
buds fail to open.Infected floral parts become discoloured, dwarfed and dried
Management
Collect and destroy infected plant debris
Four sprays with wettable Sulphur@0.3% or carbendazim@0.1% or Dinocap@0.1% at
10 days interval
Resistant varieties: Ashwini, Ambika, Angeles, American pride, Surabhi
2) Black spot – Diplocarpan rosae (Anamorph: Marssonina rosae)
Symptoms
Dark brown tar coloured spots with fringed borders.Spots coalesce forming large patches.
Infected leaves turn brown and defoliate.Fungus may also attack stems and flowers.On stems,
infected areas are blackened with blistered appearance dotted withpustules
Management
Affected parts should be collected and destroyed
Spray Tridemorph @0.025% or benomyl @0.1% at weekly intervals starting withthe
sprouting of the plants till new foliage appears.
Shade and extensive irrigation should be avoided.
Resistant varieties: Bebe bune, coronado ,Grand opera, sphinx.
Radiance - escape infection due to waxy surface
3) Die-back – Diplodia rosarum
Symptoms
Infection starts from the pruned surface of the twigs.Infected twig becomes brown to dark
brown or black and dries from tip downwards. Infection spreads from twig to mainstem and
roots and finally whole plant is killed.
Management
Diseased twigs should be carefully removed and destroyed
After pruning the cut end should be protected with chaubattia paste
Spray Difolatan@0.2% or mancozeb@0.2% or Chlorothalonil@0.2% in earlySep and lateOct
Resistant varieties: Blue moon, Red gold, Summer queen, etc.
Lecture 47
DISEASES OF TURMERIC
1) Rhizome rot – Pythium aphanidermatum, P. graminicolum
Symptoms
The disease occurs in patches. Infected plants show progressive drying up of the leaf first
along the margins and later entire leaf.The root system is adversely affectedleaving few
decaying brownroots. Infection gradually spreads to rhizomes which begin to rot, become
soft andturn brown.
Management
Crop rotation with non-hosts
Grow turmeric in light soils with good drainage
Use disease free rhizomes for planting
Rhizomes should be dipped in Metalaxyl@2.5g/l or Bordeaux mixture@1%
solution for 40 minutes
Drench the soil at root region with captan@2 g or COC@2.5 g or metalaxyl@1 g
per liter in the initial stages of the disease
Turmeric varieties, PCT-13 and PCT-14 are resistant to this disease.
2) Leaf spot – Colletotrichum capsici
Symptoms
Fungus attacks only leaves, elliptic to oblong spotsof different sizes appear on both the
surfaces,but more on upper surface and gradually increase in size. Mature spots have grayish
center with dark brown margins surrounded by a yellow halo.Central portion of the spot
becomes thin and papery.Several spots coalesce to form irregular necrotic patches
Management
Remove and destroy infected plant debris
Treat rhizomes with COC@0.25% solution
Spray Carbendazim@0.1% or Mancozeb@0.25%. during Aug-Dec along with
sandovit@0.5 ml/lt
Avoid excess shading
Tolerant varieties: TS-2, TS-4, TS-9, TS-88
Lecture 48
DISEASES OF ZINGER
1) Rhizome rot/soft rot – Pythium sp.
Symptoms
When infection takesplace through contaminated seed, sprouts fail to grow resulting in pre-
emergencedamping off.If the disease strikes after sprouting leaves turnpale green.Yellowing
is noticed on the top leaves followed by withering and drying of the dead area. Dead leaves
ultimately drop off .On stem, a translucent brown lesion develop at collar region and later
becomes water soaked and soft.Soft rot extends from the collar region to rhizomes which first
become discolouredand gradually decompose, forming a watery mass of putrifying tissues
enclosed bytough ring of rhizome.Roots arising from affected rhizomeundergo rotting and
softening.
Favourable conditions
Mimegralla flies play a role in the spread of the pathogen
Management
Crop rotation for 3-5 years with non-host crops, Avoid water stagnation
Collect the seed from disease free plots, Rhizome treatment with Metalaxyl@0.2%
Drench the field with COC@0.3% or Metalaxyl@0.2%
Control the Mimegralla insects by 0.05% methyl parathion
2) Leaf spot – Phyllosticta zingiberi
Symptoms
Initially disease appears as small, yellowish oval to elongated spots on the leaves.The spots
enlarge; turn to white and papery at the centre with dark brown marginsurrounded by a
yellow halo.Spots are usually isolated but under humid conditions they coalesce with
oneanother developing towards margin forming a big lesion.
Management
Growing zinger in partial shade reduces the disease incidence
Spray Mancozeb@0.25% or COC@0.25% during monsoon
