PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
DA 121
SOIL CHEMISTRY &
FERTILITY
THEORY
S. Sridevi
V. Sri Ramya
&
K. Kalyani
R A J END R A NA GA R , H Y D ER ABA D - 500030
PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
DA-121
SOIL CHEMISTRY AND FERTILITY
By
Smt. V. SRI RAMYA
ASST. PROFESSOR (SS&AC), APT, KAMPASAGAR
&
Dr. S. SRIDEVI
PRINCIPAL, APT, TORNALA
&
Dr. K. KALYANI
ASST. PROFESSOR (SS&AC), APT, PALEM
LECTURE OUTLINES
S. No . Title of the Lecture
1 Introduction to soil science
2 Soil - Definition- Properties- Difference between soil and sub soil
3 Components of soil- Mineral matter- Organic matter, water and air
4 Soil physical properties- soil texture – Importance- Nature and properties of soil
separates- Methods of estimation of soil texture- Soil textural classes
5 Soil structure- Classification- Importance of soil structure and its management
6 Soil density- Bulk density and particle density- Factors affecting soil density
7 Soil pore space- Importance- Calculation of porosity- Soil colour – Its significance-
Soil temperature-Importance
Soil water- Importance- Soil moisture constants- Infiltration – Percolation
8
Permeability – Drainage, Importance of drainage
9 Soil biology- Classification of soil microbes
10 Role of beneficial microorganisms in various processes of soil- Harmful
microorganisms in soil
11 Soil organic matter- Various sources - Compounds in plant residues - Their
decomposability
12 C:N ratio- Significance of C:N ration in soil fertility
13 Humus- its importance on soil properties- Care and management of soil humus
14 Soil colloids- Properties of soil colloids
15 Ion exchange in soil – Cation exchange
16 Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC) -Factors affecting CEC- Importance
17 Anion Exchange capacity (AEC) - Factors affecting AEC
18 Base saturation - buffering capacity-its importance
19 Soil Reaction – pH scale- factors affecting soil pH
20 Effect of pH on nutrient availability
Problem soils: Units of expression for salinity and alkalinity - Characteristics of
21
Acid, Saline, Saline Sodic, Sodic and Calcareous soils - Formation & Nutrient
availability in problem soils
Reclamation of Problematic Soils – Mechanical, Chemical and Biological methods
22
Important soil groups of India; Alluvial soils, Black soils, red soils, laterite soils and
23
coastal sands
24 Essential Nutrients for plants- Criteria of essentiality of nutrients – Classification of
essential nutrients- Forms of nutrients in soil
25 Importance of essential nutrients to plants
26 Functions, Deficiency symptoms and corrective measures of N,P,K, Ca, Mg and S
27 Functions, Deficiency symptoms and corrective measures of Micronutrients
28 Soil fertility - reasons for soil fertility reduction- Management practices to improve
soil fertility
29 Soil testing objectives- Importance
30 Site Specific Nutrient Management
31 Environmental pollution- Soil pollution- Soil pollutants and management practices
32 Greenhouse effect – Greenhouse gases- Management Practices to reduce GHG
emissions
REFERENCES:
S.No. Name of the Book Name of the Authors
1 Introductory Soil Science Dilip Kumar Das, 2004, Kalyani Publishers,
Ludhiana.
2 Text book of soil science Biswas T.D and Mukherjee S.K. 1987. Tata
McGraw Hill Publishing Co.Ltd., New Delhi
3 Soil Physics Ghildyal B.P and Tripati R.P.1987. Wiley Eastern
Ltd. New Delhi.
4 Soil Fertility : Theory and J.S. Kanwar (Ed). 1976. ICAR, New Delhi
Practice
5 Soil Fertility and Tisdale S.L., Nelson, W.L. and Beaton, J.D. (1993).
Fertilizers Macmillan Publishing Company, New York
6. Yawalkar K.S, Agarwal, T.P and Bokde, S 1995.
Manures and fertilisers
Nagpur
7 Fundamentals of Soil Published by Indian Society of Soil Science, 1998,
Science IARI, New Delhi.
8 Fertilizers Guide Tandon HLS 1994, Fertilizers Development
Consulation Organization, New Delhi
Lecture. 1. Introduction to Soil Science
Soil plays a vital role in earth’s ecosystem. The soil is important to human and all living
things on earth. From the agriculture, cultivators recognized good soils being attracted to the
fertile soils of river valleys. Most great civilizations have depended on good soils. Continuous
replenishment of fertility by natural flooding made possible the stable, organized communities
and even cities, in contrast to the nomadic, shifting societies. Mismanagement of fertile soils is
the only contributing factor for the down fall of the society. The careful preservation of the soil
mantle can be the difference between a prosperous society and poverty.
The noun soil is derived through old French from the latin word solum, which means
floor or ground.
Soil may be defined as an accumulation of natural bodies which has been synthesized
in profile form from a diversified mixture of disintegrated and weathered minerals and
decaying organic matter which covers the surface of the earth, and which supplies, when
containing the optimum amounts of air and water, mechanical support and sustenance for
plants.
The soil serves not only as a medium for plant growth and for microbiological
activity but also as a sink and recycling factory for numerous waste products which might
otherwise accumulate to poison our environment. Moreover, the soil supports our buildings
and provides material for the construction of earthen structures such as dams and road beds.
Shifting Cultivation-Sustainable Agriculture
Shifting cultivation, a primitive system of Agriculture, the first step in transition from
food gathering and hunting to food production nearly 9000 years old agricultural practice. This
is extensively practiced by the tribals throughout the tropical and subtropical region.
Shifting cultivation is a form of agricultural
practice or a cultivation system in which an area of
ground is cleared of vegetation and cultivated for a
few years and then abandoned for a new area until its
fertility has been naturally restored.
Conventionally, shifting cultivation has been
interpreted and inefficient (economically) and destructive (ecologically) form of Agriculture.
After that, the Rainfed based farming shifted to sustainable farming through the availability of
water source.
Sustainable agriculture is the practice of farming using principles of ecology, the
study of relationships between organisms and their environment. An integrated system of plant
and the animal production practices having site-specific application that will, over the long
term. A sustainable agricultural system involves the modification of agricultural techniques in
both existing industrialized and traditional agricultural systems in order to provide for the
needs of current and future generations while conserving natural resources. Thus, the man
realized soil properties, soil fertility and soil production.
Reasons for Soil Degradation
There are several physical factors contributing to soil degradation distinguished by the
manners in which they change the natural composition and structure of the soil. Rainfall,
surface runoff, floods, wind erosion, tillage, and mass movements result in the loss of fertile
top spoil thereby declining soil quality. The reasons are
1. Deforestation: Over cutting of vegetation may accelerate the soil erosion process,
especially during rainy season.
2. Industrialization: Development of the industries for the economic growth of the
country lead to excessive deforestation and utilization of such in soil as way that has
lost its natural upgradation quality.
3. Improper Crop Rotation: Due to shortage of land, increase of population and
economic pressure the farmers have adopted intensive cropping pattern of commercial
crops in place of more balanced cereal-legume rotations
4. Urbanization: Urban growth, road construction are major causes in soil degradation.
For this valuable agricultural land is often lost.
5. Over Grazing: In India pasture land is decreasing day by day due to expansion of
agricultural land. Over grazing directly leads to disappearance of vegetation which is
one of the important causes of wind and water erosion in dry lands.
6. Mining: Mining disturbs the physical, chemical and biological features of the soil. The
erodible material is almost devoid of organic matter and lacks in mineral plant
nutrition.
7. Improper use of fertilizers: Soil fertility is reduced due to prolonged intensive
cultivation. The farmers maintain the productivity of soil by applying organic manures
and fertilizers instead of using chemical fertilizers.
Farmer vs Agricultural Scientists –Their Role in Agriculture
Agriculture is the process of producing food, feed, fiber and many other desired
products by the cultivation of certain plants and the raising of domesticated animals
(livestock).
The practice of agriculture is also known as "farming", while scientists, inventors and others
devoted to improving farming methods and implements are also said to be engaged in
agriculture.
Subsistence farming, who farms a small area with limited resource inputs, and produces
only enough food to meet the needs of his/her family.
At the other end is commercial intensive agriculture, including industrial agriculture.
Such farming involves large fields and/or numbers of animals, large resource inputs
(pesticides, fertilizers, etc.), and a high level of mechanization. These operations generally
attempt to maximize financial income from grain, produce, or livestock.
Modern agriculture extends well beyond the traditional production of food for humans
and animal feeds.
Other agricultural production goods include timber, fertilizers, animal hides, leather,
industrial chemicals (starch, sugar, alcohols and resins), fibers (cotton, wool, hemp, silk and
flax), fuels (methane from biomass, ethanol, biodiesel), cut flowers, ornamental and nursery
plants, tropical fish and birds for the pet trade, and both legal and illegal drugs
(biopharmaceuticals, tobacco, marijuana, opium, cocaine).
Lecture 2. Soil-Definition-Properties-Differences
between Surface and Sub–Surface Soil
Soil is a three dimensional body having length, breadth and depth. It forms a continuation over
the land surface and differs in properties from place to place. Its upper boundary is air or water
and lower boundary is the rock lithosphere
Soil can be compared to various systems of animals
Digestive system : Organic matter decomposition
Respiratory system : Air circulation & exchange of gases
Circulatory system (blood): Water movement within the soil
Excretory system : Leaching out of excess salts
Brain : Soil clay
Colour : Soil colour
Height : Soil depth
SOIL- DEFINITIONS
“Soil is a natural body composed of inorganic and organic constituents, having a definite
genesis and a distinct nature of its own”-- Dokuchaev (1900) a Russian scientist - Father of
Soil Science
“Soil is a natural occurring body that has been evolved owing to combined influence of climate
and other organisms, acting on parent material, as conditioned by relief over a period of time” -
Jenny (1941)
“Soil may be defined as "A dynamic natured body on the surface of the earth in which plants
grow, composed of mineral and organic materials and living forms" - Buckman & Brady
“Soil is the unconsolidated mineral matter on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as
a natural medium for the growth of land plants”
SOIL PROPERTIES
Soil can be defined in terms of soil forming factors. “Soil is a dynamic natural body having
properties derived from the combined effect of climate and biotic activities as modified by
topography acting on parent materials over a period of time.
1. Soil is a medium for crop germination, growth and yield.
2. It acts as a storage reservoir for nutrients and water needed for plant growth.
3. It improves physical, chemical properties of soils and enhances nutrient availability
to plants.
Differences between Surface and Sub -Surface Soils
S.No. Property Surface Soil Sub Surface Soil
1. Depth (cm) 0-30 >30
2. Organic matter content (%) More Less
3. Physical Appearance Loose and granular Compact
4. Porosity Porous Massive
5. Colour Dark Light
6. Biological activity High Low
7. Utilization More Less
8. Root activity More Less
9. Essential nutrients are More Less
present in available form
10. Cation Exchange Capacity Very High Low
11. Water Holding Capacity More Less
12. Nutrient Availability More Less
Lecture 3. Components of Soil- Mineral Matter- Organic
Matter, Water and Air
SOIL COMPONENTS
Mineral soil consists of four major components i.e., inorganic or mineral materials,
organic matter, water and air. In a representative loam
surface soil, the solid mineral particles comprise about
45% of the soil volume and organic matter 5%. At
optimum moisture for plant growth, the pore space is
divided roughly in half, 25 % of volume being water
space and 25 % air. The proportions of air and water are
subjected to rapid and great fluctuations. The four soil
components occur in a thoroughly mixed condition in
soil and this mixture encourages interactions within and between the groups and permits
marked variations in the environment for the growth of plants.
MINERAL MATTER
The Inorganic portion of soils is quite variable in size and composition. It is composed of small
rock fragments and minerals of various kinds.
Rock Fragments
2.0 - 75.0 mm - Gravel or pebbles
75.0 - 250.0 mm - Cobbles (round) flags (flat)
> 250.0 mm - Stones or boulders - Used for Agriculture
Soil Particles
Particle Name Size in mm Particles Area Surface Visibility
number per (sq.cm/g)
gram soil
Sand (gritty) 0.2 - 2.0 mm 5.4X102 21 Visible directly
Fine sand (gritty) 0.02 - 0.2 mm 5.4X105 210 Visible directly
Silt (powdery) 0.002 - 0.02 mm 5.4X108 2100 Visible with Microscope
Clay (sticky) < 0.002 mm 7.2X1011 23000 Visible with Electron
Microscope
The proportion of different sized particles (texture) determines the nutrient supplying
power of the soil, considerably. Primary minerals (original) are prominent in sand and silt
fractions; whereas the secondary minerals (formed) dominate in clay fraction and in some
cases the silt fraction. The inorganic fraction of soil is the original source of most of the
mineral elements that are essential for plant growth. The air and water are extremely variable
and their proportions determine in large degree the soil’s suitability for the plant growth.
ORGANIC MATTER
It comprises an accumulation of partially disintegrated and decomposed plant and
animal residues and other organic compounds synthesized by soil microbes as the decay
occurs. It is a transitory soil constituent as it is continuously broken down by soil organisms
and lasts from few hours to several hundred years. It requires maintenance by regular addition
to the soil of plant and/ or animal residues. Organic matter content varies from 1.0 to 6.0 % by
weight in top soil and very less in sub soil. In respect of soil productivity organic matter plays
an indispensable role.
SOIL AIR
The content and composition of soil air are determined largely by the water content of
the soil, since the air occupies those soil pores not filled with water. Soil air always differs
from atmosphere air in composition because of moisture content, root and microbial activities.
Relative humidity may approach 100% at optimum soil moisture, CO content is often several
2
hundred times higher than 0.033%, Oxygen content usually < 20%. In extreme cases only 5-
10%. In cases of low soil air, the diffusion rate of air in to and out of the soil would be slow
and this leads to unsatisfactory conditions for optimum plant growth.
Gases Soil air (%) Atmospheric air (%)
Nitrogen 79.20 79.00
Oxygen 20.60 20.97
Carbon dioxide 0.50 (variable) 0.033
CO content vary from 10-10000 times to that of atmospheric air
2
SOIL WATER
Soil water is held in soil pores with varying degrees of tenacity depending on the
amount of water present and size of the pores. Soil water with its soluble constituents
(nutrients) makes up soil solution, which is the critical medium for supplying nutrients to
growing plants. Soil water plays significant role in controlling energy balance of the soil and
regulates the gaseous exchange in the upper layer of the soil. The presence of water in different
amounts in soil governs its thermal, mechanical, physical, chemical and biological properties.
SOIL MICROORGANISMS
There are enormous numbers of microorganisms like Fungi, Bacteria, Algae,
Actinomycetes, Nematodes etc. in soil depends on availability of organic matter, air and water.
They provide nutrients to plants in readily available forms and decompose the organic matter
in to humus through various biological activities.
Lecture 4. Soil Physical Properties-Soil Texture-
Importance-Nature and Properties of Soil
Separates-Methods of Estimation of Soil
Texture-Soil Textural Classes
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SOIL
 Soil Texture
 Soil Structure
 Bulk Density and Particle Density
 Macro and Micro Pores
 Soil Color
 Soil Temperature
 Soil Water
SOIL TEXTURE
Soil texture may be defined as the relative proportion of particles of various sizes (soil
separates /mechanical fractions) such as sand, silt and clay. It is almost a permanent property of
the soil and may change slowly with time.
The soil properties like porosity, aeration, water retention capacity, infiltration capacity,
water flow, water supply mainly depends on soil texture.
The particle size of a mineral soil does not change readily. For example, a clayey soil
remains clayey, a loamy soil remains loamy and a sandy soil remains sandy over many years.
As the texture of a soil (i.e. proportion of different sized particles in a soil) cannot be easily
altered, it is considered a basic property of a soil.
IMPORTANCE OF SOIL TEXTURE
1. Knowledge of texture of the soil is important to assess the value of the land
2. Land capability and methods of soil management are determined by soil texture.
3. Texture determines the suitability of land to raise different crops in different seasons
4. Its suitability for foundation of buildings and construction of roads.
5. Texture determines the total pore space and the distribution of macro and micro pores of
soil, which in turn influence the retention and transmission of water as well as air.
6. Soil texture largely governs the nutrient holding and nutrient supplying abilities of the
soils.
7. It is the most stable property and used as an index of several other properties of soils,
which determines the agricultural potential of the soils.
8. It helps in evaluating the amount of amendment needed for the soil reclamation
Ex: Acid soils (<6.0 PH) Reclamation materials: Calcium Carbonate, Calcium Oxide,
Calcium Hydroxide, Basic slag of liming materials
Ex: Basic soils (>8.5-10 PH) Reclamation materials: Zypsum (CaSO . 2H O)
4 2
9. Soil texture is of considerable importance in the study of morphology, genesis of soil,
classification and mapping.
10. Texture has pronounced effect on soil temperature.
CLASSIFICATION OF SOIL SEPARATES
Scientists separated the mineral particles of a soil into various groups on the basis of
their size. These groups are referred to as soil separates. Thus soil separates may be defined as
the individual size groups of mineral soil particles which are 2 mm or less in diameter. Soil
separates are also known as fine earth.
There are two most important systems of classification of soil separates are described
below
1. ISSS (International Society of Soil Science) classification
2. USDA (United States Department of Agriculture) classification
Soil Separates ISSS system (mm) USDA system (mm)
Very Coarse Sand - 2.00 – 1.00
Coarse Sand 2.00 – 0.20 1.00 – 0.50
Medium Sand - 0.50 – 0.25
Fine Sand 0.20 – 0.02 0.25 – 0.10
Very Fine Sand - 0.10 – 0.05
Silt 0.02 – 0.002 0.05 – 0.002
Clay < 0.002 < 0.002
PROPERTIES OF SOIL SEPERATES
1. Sand: Sand particles may be rounded or irregular with quite jagged surfaces depending on
the abrasion they receive. These particles exhibit no plasticity and stickiness and hence less
influenced by changes in moisture content. Their water holding capacity is low, percolation
rate is high and facilitate good drainage and good air movement. Soils dominated by sand and
other particles bigger than sand are invariably open, loose and in friable condition. As these
fractions are the fragments of the rocks with quartz as chief component, they are chemically
inactive and insoluble.
2. Silt is intermediate between sand and clay in size (ISSS – 0.02 – 0.002 mm; USDA – 0.05 –
0.002 mm) and irregular in shape. Mineralogically and physically, silt particles greatly
resemble sand particles, but since they are smaller and have a greater surface area per unit mass
and are often coated with strongly adherent clay, they may exhibit some of the physico-
chemical attributes of clay. Silt is dominated by quartz and micas like primary minerals; and
posses some plasticity, cohesion and adsorption. They hold moisture but lesser than clay.
3. Clay fraction is less than 0.002 mm in size and forms the decisive fraction of the soil, which
has most influence on soil behavior. Clay particles are characteristically plate like or needle
like in shape. Clay particles adsorb water and hydrate, thereby causing the soil to swell upon
wetting and then shrink upon drying. They are very plastic and sticky in moist condition; and
become hard and cloddy when dry. High tenacity of clay makes the cultivation difficult. The
relatively inert sand and silt fractions can be called the ‘Soil Skeleton”, while the clay, by
analogy, can be thought of as the “Flesh” of the soil.
Stones, cobbles and Gravel: Because of their sizes, function as separate particles. Stones,
cobbles and gravel may be more or less rounded, irregularly angular or even flat.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN SOIL SEPERATES
S. Property Sand Silt Clay
No.
1 Size 2.00 – 0.02 0.02 – 0.002 < 0.002
2 Specific Surface Area Low Medium High
3 Shape Round Shapeless Flaky shape
4 Reactivity Low Medium High
5 Micro pores type High Medium Low
6 Micro pores Porosity Low Medium High
7 Water holding Capacity Low Medium to high High
8 Drainage Facility High Slow to medium Very slow
9 Plasticity Non plastic Slightly plasticity Very plasticity
10 Stickiness Non sticky slightly sticky Very sticky
11 Tillage Easy Medium Tough
12 Cation Exchange Capacity Low Medium High
13 Soil Fertility Low Medium High
The relatively inert sand and silt fractions can be called the ‘Soil Skeleton”, while the clay, by
analogy, can be thought of as the “Flesh” of the soil.
Soil particle divisions
Different types of soil particles, their sizes and ratios
Soil Class Size (mm) Sandy Soil Loamy soil Black soil
Coarse Sand 2.00 – 0.20 85.1 27.1 0.9
Fine Sand 0.20 – 0.02 8.2 30.3 7.1
Silt 0.02 – 0.002 1.4 20.2 21.4
Clay < 0.002 3.4 19.3 65.8
Sandy soil: These soils include soils having more sand (85.1+8.2=93.3) percentage and less
silt and clay (1.4+3.4=4.8) percentage. As the soils of this group have very low water holding
capacity and nutrient retention capacity but drainage condition and aeration status is high.
Clay soil: These soils contain soils having less sand (0.9+7.1=8.0) percentage and more silt
and clay (21.4+65.8=87.2) percentage. As they have high water holding capacity and nutrient
retention capacity but internal drainage condition or soil aeration is very poor.
Loamy soil: These soils contains soils having (27.1+30.3=57.4) sand percentage and silt, clay
(20.2+19.3=39.5) percentage. As they have high have high water holding capacity and nutrient
retention capacity, and good internal drainage condition. This soil has medium plant available
water and fair drainage condition for getting better plant growth and yield.
METHODS OF ESTIMATION OF SOIL TEXTURE
Soil texture may be assessed subjectively in the field or more rigorously by particle size
analysis in the laboratory.
Field or Feel Method
The common field method of determining the textural class of a soil is by its FEEL. Feel
method is of great practical value in Soil Survey, Soil Classification and in any other
investigation in which Soil Texture may play a role. Accuracy depends on experience. A soil
surveyor determines texture by moistening a soil sample and kneading it between fingers and
thumb until aggregates are broken down and the soil grains thoroughly wetted. The way the
wet soil sticks out gives a good idea of the quantity of clay content. The sand particles are
gritty, the silt has a floury or talcum powder feel when dry and is only moderately plastic and
sticky when wet, persistent cloddiness generally is imparted by silt and clay.
Laboratory Method
Particle Size Analysis / Mechanical Analysis: The procedure of separating out different sized
soil fractions i.e., sand, silt and clay and of measuring their proportional distribution is called
particle size analysis or mechanical analysis. The result is expressed as Mechanical
composition of soil or Soil Texture.
There are two steps in mechanical analysis
a. Dispersion
b. Sedimentation
Dispersion
Dispersion of soil particles is achieved by breaking down the cementing agents viz., organic
matter, calcium carbonate and iron oxides; and flocculating agents like salts and ions. Removal
of organic matter is usually achieved by oxidation with hydrogen peroxide and calcium
carbonate can be dissolved by addition of dilute hydrochloric acid. Treating the soil
withsodiumcitrate. Sodium bicarbonate and sodium dithionate does remove iron and aluminum
oxides, which are significantly present in red and laterite soils. Through repeated washings
salts and ions can be eliminated. Dispersion or deflocculation is carried by means of a chemical
dispersing agent like sodium hexametaphosphate and by mechanical agitation. Other peptizing
agents or deflocculating agents, which are commonly used, are sodium oxalate, sodium
phosphate, and sodium metaphosphate and sodium pyrophosphate.
Now particles of 2 to 0.2 mm (coarse sand) are separated by sieving through 0.2 mm
sieve. For separation of remaining particle sedimentation technique is used
Sedimentation
It is based on measuring the relative settling velocities of particles of various sizes from
aqueous suspension in a given medium larger particles settle more quickly than smaller ones of
the same density. The relation between particle density and rate of fall is expressed by Stokes’
law.
There are two widely accepted methods, which obey Stoke’s law of sedimentation
Robinson’s Pipette Method
Also known as International pipette method. It is based on the sedimentation principle i.e.,
particles with different sizes and weights fall at different
velocities. If a sample of soil suspension is taken at a
given depth at particular time interval, this contains all
the particles which are in suspension at that time at that
depth. In this method a definite volume of soil
suspension is taken from a required depth at definite
time intervals using Robinson’s pipette.
At 25ºC a sample collected at 4min 15 sec time at 10 cm depth in the sedimentation
cylinder contains silt and clay particles, while sample collected at 7 hrs 6 min interval contains
only clay fraction. After drying the samples to constant weight silt and clay contents can be
calculated. Fine sand left at the bottom can be separated out, dried and weighed.
The pipette method is regarded as the standard method for particle size analysis because
of its accuracy. It is however very time consuming and difficult to be employed in mechanical
analysis of large number of samples.
Bouyoucos Hydrometer Method
It is based on the principle that there is a continuous
decrease in the density of soil suspension over a period of
time. So by knowing the density of soil suspension at
required time intervals with a calibrated hydrometer the proportion of different fractions can be
known.
The hydrometer method is rapid but less accurate than the pipette method. This method
gives erroneous results in soils having high CaCO and organic matter contents and high
3
salinity.
1st Reading at 40 seconds (Sand fraction) or reading at 4min. (Silt +Clay)
2nd reading after two hours (Clay fraction) : Silt = (Silt+Clay) – Clay
Silt = 100 – [Sand + Clay];
Sand =100 – (Silt + Clay)
Robinson’s Pipette Method Bouyoucos Hydrometer Method
It is based on the sedimentation principle i.e., It is based on the principle that there is a
particles with different sizes and weights fall continuous decrease in the density of soil
at different velocities. suspension over a period of time.
In this method a definite volume of soil By knowing the density of soil suspension at
suspension is taken from a required depth at required time intervals with a calibrated
definite time intervals using Robinson’s hydrometer the proportion of different
pipette. fractions can be known.
It takes more time to complete the process Fast method - It takes less time to complete
the process
Difficult to be employed in mechanical This method gives erroneous results in soils
analysis of large no. of samples. having high CaCO and organic matter
3
contents and high salinity.
Accurate results seen in this method Errors may be seen in this method
SOIL TEXTURAL CLASSES
Textural names are given to the soils based on each of the three soil separates – sand,
silt and clay. Soils that are preponderantly clay are called clay; Those with high silt content are
silt and those with high sand percentage are sand. Three broad and fundamental groups of soil
textural classes are recognized: sands, loams and clays.
SOIL TEXTURAL DIAGRAM
Considering the amounts of sand, silt and clay soil textural class can be determined with the
help of textural triangle. The three sides of the equilateral triangle represent percent by weight
of clay (left side), silt (right side) and sand (base side).
Lecture . 5. Soil Structure- Classification- Importance
of Soil Structure and it’s Management
SOIL STRUCTURE
Soil Structure may be defined as ‘the arrangement of primary particles (sand, silt and
clay), secondary particles (aggregates) and voids (pores) in to a certain definite pattern under
field conditions’.
In the broad sense soil structure denotes:
a) The size, shape and arrangement of particles and aggregates
b) The size, shape and arrangement of the voids or spaces separating the particles and
aggregates
c) The combination of voids and aggregates in to various types of structures.
Peds – Natural aggregates which vary in their water stability.
Clod – It is used for a coherent mass of soil broken in to any shape by artificial means such as
by tillage.
Fragment - It is a broken ped.
Concretion – It is a coherent mass formed with in the soil by the precipitation of certain
chemicals dissolved in percolating waters. Concretions are usually small like
shotgun lead pellets.
CLASSIFICATION OF STRUCTURE
Classification of soil structure for field description is based on
i) The type as determined by the shape and arrangement of peds
ii) The class, as differentiated by the size of the peds and
iii) The grade, as determined by distinctness and durability of peds.
TYPES: As per the geometric shape, the aggregates can be broadly divided in to two types.
1. Simple structure 2. Compound structure
1. Simple structure: In this the natural cleavage plains are absent or indistinct.
a. Single grain structure: Occur in sandy soils
b. Massive structure: Coherent mass with high bulk density occur in soil crusts, paddy
soils
c. Vesicular or honeycomb structure: Massive or loose aggregates of nodular
ferruginous mass. Seen in laterites.
2. Compound Structure: The natural cleavage plains are distinct. Described with relative
length of horizontal and vertical axes and shape of peds. There are mainly four types of soil
structure.
1. Plate like: In this structural type aggregates are arranged in relatively thin horizontal plates
or leaflets. Horizontal dimensions are much more developed than vertical.
a) Platy: Thick horizontal units are called platy.
b) Laminar: Thinner horizontal units are called laminar.
2. Prism – Like: In this structural type vertical axis are more developed than horizontal axis
giving a pillar like appearance. The vertically oriented aggregates occur in sub surface or B
horizon. This structure present in arid and semiarid regions of Rajatan and also present in
poorly drained soils of humid regions with swelling clay.
a) Prismatic: The prism having flat or level tops
b) Columnar: The prism having rounded tops. This structure mostly present in sodic
soils of B horizon (Natric horizon).
3. Block Like: The aggregates look like blocks having more or less equal in all dimensions.
Peds are cube like with flat or rounded faces.
a) Angular blocky: The cubes have sharp edges and distinct rectangular faces.
b) Subangular blocky: Faces and edges are mainly rounded. These types are usually
found in sub soil or B horizons, where they promote good drainage, aeration and root
penetration.
4. Spheroidal: Small rounded peds with irregular faces and are usually separated from each
other in a loosely packed arrangement.
a) Crumb: When the granules are spheroidal and porous.
b) Granular: When the granules are spheroidal and non-porous.
Granular and crumb structures are characteristic of many surface soils (A horizon)
particularly those high in organic matter. They are prominent in grassland soils and soils that
have been worked by earth worms. Usually granular peds are <1cm, while crumb peds are <0.5
cm in diameter.
ii) CLASS: Based on the size of the individual peds, the primary structural types are
differentiated in to five sub-classes.
Size or class Granular Platy Blocky Prismatic
(mm) (mm) (mm) (mm)
1. Very fine or very thin <1 <1 <5 <10
2. Fine or thin 1-2 1-2 5-10 10-20
3. Medium 2-5 2-5 1-20 20-50
4. Coarse or thick 5-10 5-10 20-50 50-100
5. Very coarse or very thick >10 >10 >50 >100
In case of crumb structure, less than 1.0 mm is very fine; 1-2 mm is fine and 2-5 mm is
medium class. The terms thin and thick are used for platy type (very fine <1 mm and very thick
>10 mm), while the terms fine and coarse are used for other structural types (very fine blocky
<5 mm and very coarse blocky >50 mm)
iii) GRADES: Grade determines the degree of distinctness and durability of individual peds.
 Structure less or simple structure: In this structure the natural cleavage plains are absent
or indistinct e.g. single grain, soil particles in sand dune areas and massive structure (no
cleavage lines) in puddle soil from a rice field.
 Weak: Poorly formed, non-durable, indistinct peds and break in to a mixture of a few
entire and many broken peds and much unaggregated material.
 Moderate: Moderately well-developed peds which are fairly durable and distinct.
 Strong: Very well formed peds, which are quite durable and distinct.
IMPORTANCE OF SOIL STRUCTURE
 Soil structure Influences the amount and nature of porosity in soils.
 Governs the water and air permeability in to soils. Available water is more in soils
having high amount of micro pores.
 Influences water holding capacity, soil-water relationship and growth of
microorganisms.
 Influences soil drainage and availability of plant nutrients.
 Soil structure has a pronounced effect on erodibility of soil
 Seedling emergence and crop yield is highly affected by soil structure.
 Soil texture is almost a permanent property of the soil but soil structure can be altered
by farming practices.
Soil structure- Importance of Microorganisms
 Collectively, soil microorganisms play an essential role in decomposing organic matter,
cycling nutrients and fertilizing the soil.
 Soil microbes are of prime importance in this process.
 Soil microbes are also important for the development of healthy soil structure.
 They are responsible for mineralization of organic matter, element circulation,
synthesis of proteins, and nucleic acids, as well as transformation of phosphorus forms.
 Soil microorganisms play an important role in the formation and stabilization of
aggregates. In sandy soils and black soils they improves water holding capacity and
drainage facility of the soil.
 Constituents of soil are organic matter, Polysaccharides, lignins and gums synthesized
by soil microbes plays important role in cementing of soil particles.
 Cells and mycelia strands of fungi and actinomycetes play important role in soil
aggregation.
 Contribute to nutrient availability in soil organic matter decomposition, humic acid,
colloidal proteins, Cellulose, humus formation, N-Fixation, seed germination.
 Earthworms also play important role in soil aggregation.
MANAGEMENT OF SOIL STRUCTURE
Soil structure management aims at the improvement and maintenance of soil structure, which
are the major challenges in cultivated lands. The general principles of management are
 The management and cultural practices for crop production have a great effect on the
formation and stability of soil structure.
 Tilling soils at optimum moisture conditions to ensure least destruction of soil structure.
 Suitable tillage and minimum tillage practices to minimize the loss of aggregate
stabilizing organic substances.
 Covering soil surface with organic materials (mulch) to mitigate the beating action of
rain and to add organics to soil.
 Cultivation of suitable legume in a crop rotation is the most effective way of improving
and maintaining soil structure.
 Incorporation of crop residues and animal manures in to soil, which upon
decomposition, would stabilize soil aggregates.
 Suitable cropping systems, application of phosphatic fertilizers, inclusion of grasses
and sod crops in the rotation, would enhance organic matter and favor stable
aggregation.
 Green manuring and cover crops are good sources of organic matter.
 Use of synthetic organic amendments or soil conditioners.
 Use of well decomposed organic manures improves the soil structure by increase in
macropores percentage.
 Use of phosphatic fertilizers.
Lecture 6. Soil Density- Bulk Density and Particle
Density- Factors Affecting Soil Density
DENSITY OF SOIL
Density is the weight per unit volume of a substance. It is expressed as gram per cubic
centimeter or pound per cubic feet or mega gram per cubic meter (Mg m-3). Two density
measurements like particle density and bulk density are common for soils.
BULK DENSITY
It is the mass per unit volume of dry soil (volume of solid and pore spaces). The bulk
density of a soil is always smaller than its particle density.
Loose and porous soils have low bulk densities as compared to compacted soils. Bulk
density is of importance than particle density in understanding physical behaviour of soils.
Generally in normal soils bulk density ranges from 1.0 to 1.60 Mgm-3. Finer the texture of the
soil, lesser is the bulk density.
Sand dominated soils 1.7 Mgm-3
Organic peat soils 0.5 Mgm-3
Compacted sub soils 2.0 Mgm-3
FACTORS AFFECTING BULK DENSITY
 Fine textured soils such as clay, clay loam soils have lower bulk density than coarse
textured soils such as sandy, sandy loam.
 More is the pore space, per unit volume of soil, less is the bulk density.
 Well aggregated structured soils have lower bulk densities than poorly aggregated
soils.
 Bulk density of surface soil is generally lower than that of sub surface soils and it
increases with increase in soil depth.
 Organic matter content of the soil increases, bulk density of the soil decreases.
 Crumb soil structure shows low bulk density than that of platy structure.
 Tillage temporarily reduces the bulk density but long term intense tillage increases
bulk density of soils due to reduction of soil organic matter and weakening of soil
structure.
 Cropping increases the bulk density of top soils because of destruction of soil
aggregates.
IMPORTANCE OF BULK DENSITY
 Bulk density is an indicator of soil compaction and soil health. It affects infiltration,
rooting depth/restrictions, available water capacity, soil porosity, plant nutrient
availability, and soil microorganism activity, which influence key soil processes and
productivity
 Bulk density of the soil determines not only total pore space but the macro and micro
pore space also, which in turn governs the soil – water – air relationship, thereby
facilitate better crop growth.
 Infiltration, permeability, percolation of water and water retention in soil system, has
direct relation with bulk density of soil.
PARTICLE DENSITY
Particle density may be defined as the mass of soil solid or mass of dry soil per unit
volume of soil solids. Particle density is essentially the same as the specific gravity of solid
substances. The chemical composition and crystal structure of a mineral determines its particle
density. Particle density is not affected by pore space and therefore is not related to particle
size or to the arrangement of particles (soil structure).
Particle densities for most mineral soils vary between the narrow limits of 2.60 to 2.75
Mg m-3. The particle density of soils with very high organic matter content may vary from 0.9
to 1.3 Mgm-3. Particle density of soils is almost a permanent character which is not influenced
by addition of organic matter, tillage or depth. Particle density is always higher than bulk
density.
Lecture. 7. Soil Pore Space- Importance- Calculation of
Porosity- Soil Colour – It’s Significance-Soil
Temerature-Importance
POROSITY OF SOIL
The pore space (Voids) or Porosity of soil is that portion of the total soil volume not occupied
by solid particles either mineral or organic but occupied by air and/or water. It is normally
expressed in percentage.
The pore spaces under field conditions are occupied at all times by air and water. Pore
spaces directly control the amount of water and air in the soil and indirectly influence the plant
growth and crop production.
Soil pores are two types a. Macro pores
b. Micro pores or capillary pores
Macro pores: Large sized pores (>0.06mm) invariably exist in between sand sized granules
and allow air and water movement readily.
Micro or capillary pores: Smaller sized pores (<0.06mm) in which movement of air and
water are restricted to some extent. These pores are very important for crop growth. Generally
clays and clayey soils have a greater number of capillary pores.
The existence of approximately equal number of macro and micro pores would facilitate
better aeration, permeability, drainage and water retention. Porosity of soil is always prone for
changes.
Porosity percentage in different soils
S. No. Soil type Porosity
percentage
1. Sandy soil 30
2. Shallow Black soil 35
3. Medium Black soil 40
4. Deep Black soil 45
5. Black cotton soil 47-50
6. Clay soil 50
7. Deep clay soils 66
Calculation of porosity
In any soil % Pore space + % solid space = 100
% Solid space = Bulk density / Particle density x 100
% Pore space = 100 - % solid space
= 100 - (B.D/P.D) x 100
= 100 [1-BD/PD]
FACTORS AFFECTING POROSITY
Soil Structure: A soil having granular or crumb structure contains more pore spaces than that
of prismatic and platy soil structure. So the well aggregated soil structure has more
porosity than that of structure less or single grained soils.
Soil Texture: In sandy soils the total pore space is small; whereas in fine textured clay and
clay loams total pore space and micro pores are higher.
Organic Matter Content: OM facilitates more aggregation there by more porosity.
Depth of Soil: With increase in depth of soil the porosity will decrease because of
compactness in sub -soil.
Organisms: Macro organisms like earth worms, rodents, and insects etc., increase macro
pores.
Cultivation: Intensive cultivation tends to lower the porosity of soil as compared to fallow
soils. The decrease in porosity is due to reduction in organic matter content.
SOIL COLOUR
The colour is one of the most obvious characteristics of soil and is frequently used to
describe soil, than any other. Soil color, as such, does not have any influence on plant growth,
but through its influence on soil temperature and soil moisture, it indirectly influences the plant
growth. The colour is the property of an object that depends on the wavelength of light it
reflects or emits.
Soil colour can be an indicator of the climatic condition (acquired or pedochromic) color
under which a soil was developed or of its parent material (litho chromic color). Soil color is
also taken as criteria for assessing soil productivity.
Practically all colours occur in soils, except pure blue and pure green. Predominantly,
soil colors are not pure but mixtures, such as grey, brown and rust. Frequently, two or three
colours occur in patches, which is called as “mottling”.
The colour of the soil is a composite of the colours of its components. Soils display a
variety of colours like red, brown, yellow, green, grey, black, white etc. The effect of these
components on the color of the composite soil is roughly proportional to their total surface,
which is equal to their specific surface times their volume percentage in the soil. So- the
colloidal material will have greatest impact on soil color i.e., iron oxides and humus.
Humus – brown or dark brown.
Iron oxides – red, rust – brown, or yellow depending upon degree of hydration.
Reduced iron – blue green
Quartz – white
Lime stones – white, gray or sometimes olive green.
Humid temperate regions – Grayish
Tropics and sub tropics – red and yellow
SIGNIFICANCE OF SOIL COLOUR
 Colour is taken as a diagnostic criterion for classifying soils e.g. the comprehensive
system uses color as formative element in its nomenclature as alb (white), ochr
(light coloured), umbr (dark), sambr (dark).
 Soil color can be guide to the climatic soil group, to the parent material, or to the
physiographic location.
 Humid temperate regions – Grayish;
 Tropics and sub tropics – red and yellow
 The productivity of the soils is assessed based on soil color e.g. dark color is an
indication of high productivity.
 Colour indicates the presence / domination of the const ituent minerals in the soil
e.g. light colour results from preponderance of quartz mineral, red colour remits
from domination of iron rich compounds.
 Colour is used to describe soil profile.
 Soil color is indicative of presence of excessive salts.
 Soils in depression are darker than adjacent uplands.
 Soils derived from basic rocks are darker than soils derived from acidic rocks.
SOIL TEMPERATURE
Temperature is the measure of hotness of a body. In more appropriate words,
temperature is a thermal condition of a body which determines whether the body will
communicate the heat to or receive heat from another body, if two bodies having different
temperatures are put together for for thermal communication. Heat is a form of energy and
temperature is a measure of the heat energy. The heat energy refers to kinetic energy or random
motion (vibration) of molecules of a substance. The speed of vibration is directly proportional
to temperature.
Solar radiation is the source of soil heat. The flux of heat (calories or joules) into and out
of the soil determines the soil thermal regime, which is characterized in terms of soil
temperature (°C).
On an average only 50% of solar radiation reaches the earth, because of clouds and dust
particles intercept the sun rays. This energy is primarily utilized to evaporate water from soil or
leaf surface or is radiated or reflected back to the sky. Only about 10% is absorbed by soil,
which is of critical importance to soil processes and to plants growing on the soil.
Importance of Temperature:
 Soil temperature and soil water generally controls the intensity of physical, chemical
and biological processes occur in the soil.
 Encourages the physical disintegration of rocks and minerals
 Evaporation and soil aeration generally increases with increase in soil temperature.
 Soil temperature also affects the soil structure through freezing and thawing.
 Microbial activity, nutrient transformation due to decomposition of organic matter,
germination of seed, root growth are highly dependent on temperature.
Lecture 8. Soil water-Importance-Soil moisture constants–
Infiltration–Percolation–Permeability–Drainage,
Importance of drainage
SOIL WATER
Soil serves as a regulated reservoir for water, as it receives precipitation and irrigation.
Water is an excellent solvent of most of the plant nutrients and is a primary requisite for plant
growth.
The water that fills part of the pore spaces established between the solid particles of soil
is known as soil water. It is the liquid phase of the soil and is important as the other two phases
of the soil system. It has profound influence on the life of the plant, at all the stages.
Importance of soil water
 It dissolves and carries nutrients to the plant.
 It helps in soil formation
 It makes soil biological active by supporting flora and fauna.
 It carries dissolved oxygen in to the soil
 It keeps soil from getting too cold or too hot.
Soil Moisture Constants
Knowledge about amount of water held by the soil at various tensions is required to
calculate the amount of water available to plants, the amount of water retained by the soil
before percolation starts and the amount of water that is favourable for irrigation.
Soil moisture constants are expressed in terms of the energy with which the water is
held at that moisture content and the relationship is a continuous function without break. For
practical use and tabulate the moisture data, it is necessary to compare moisture tension with
some reference points. These reference points are known as ‘Moisture Constants’.
Soil moisture constants: Amount of water that soil contains at each of these equilibrium
points is called as Soil moisture constants
1. Saturation - “O”
2. Field capacity -1/3 bars
3. Wilting coefficient -15 bars
4. Hygroscopic coefficient -31 bars
5. Air dry soil -1,000 bars
6. Oven dry soil -10,000 bars
Saturation
Saturation water content is the amount of moisture present, when all the pores are filled
with water. A soil whose pore spaces are completely filled with water is said to be saturated
soil and the water is at zero tension. Such a condition is established only in coarse textured
soils but not in fine textured soils as some fine capillary pores are filled with air.
So the soil normally flooded with water will not be saturated as some air is blocked.
Hence it is better to define a soil as saturated when the water is at zero tension and majority of
its pores are filled with water.
Field Capacity
After heavy rain or irrigation to the soil the water drains off rapidly for the first few
hours and then starts to drain slowly. After two or three days, this rapid movement becomes
slow and negligible later. The soil is said to be at field capacity. At this condition water moves
out of macro pores and air occupies their places. The micro pores are still filled with water,
which is available to plants. Moisture movement continues but very slowly. The moisture
tension at field capacity is 1/3 bars.
Permanent Wilting Point
It is the soil moisture content at which plants show wilting symptoms and can’t recoup
or recover even though it is kept in humid chamber. Soil moisture tension at this point is 15
bars. The ease of release of water to the plant roots is just barely too small to counter balance
the transpiration losses.
Available water
Available water is defined as that portion of water which is retained in the soil between field
capacity and the permanent wilting point.
Hygroscopic Coefficient
Hygroscopicity is the ability of a body to adsorb moisture from the atmosphere. It
largely depends on amount and type of clay, exchangeable cations and presence of free
electrolytes. Soils high in expanding type of clay minerals and organic matter have a high
hygroscopic coefficient. This water is not available to plants, but available to certain microbes.
The soil moisture tension at this point is equal to 31 bars.
Air dry soil
Moisture in air dryness is held with a force of -1000 bars of soil water potential. This water is
not available to plants
Oven dry soil
The equilibrium tension of the moisture at oven dryness is -10,000 bars of soil moisture
potential. It is determined by placing the water in an oven at 105oC until it loses no more water.
INFILTRATION: Infiltration is the downward entry of water or movement of water into the
soil surface. Vertical flow of water though the soil Column.
 Soil surface with vegetation cover has more infiltration rate than bare soil. High organic
matter in soil helps to increase infiltration.
 Irrespective of soil texture, the infiltration rate in a dry soil would be high, initially and the
infiltration rate reduces exponentially with time and attains a steady rate after a long lapse
of time. It is expressed as millimeters per hour. Infiltrate rate is high and constant in
nonswelling clay soil i.e., laterite soils.
PERCOLATION: The down ward movement of water below the root zone depth. This is the
only source of recharging ground water. Percolation occurs when the water is under pressure or
when the tension is smaller than about ½ atmosphere or when the hydraulic gradient of the
order of 1.0 or less.
PERMEABILITY: The ease with which water pass through a bulk mass of soil or a layer of
soil is the permeability of the soil.
SOIL DRAINAGE: When rainfall intensity exceeds the infiltrability of soil or the amount
of rainfall exceeds the storage capacity of soil, the excess water accumulates at the soil surface
and may keep the soil under saturated condition for longer time.
IMPORTANCE OF DRAINAGE
1. Drainage is essential, as the crop growth will be drastically affected by continuous soil
saturation with water.
2. Soil saturation may encourage certain diseases and parasites.
3. Poor drainage leads to the development of salt affected soils.
4. High water table may limit root penetration.
5. Soil saturation stops the gaseous exchange causing oxygen deficiency and accumulation of
CO to toxic levels in root zone.
2
6. Wet soil requires more heat to warm up than dry soil, due to high specific heat of water, the
growing season for winter crops is shortened in poorly drained soils.
7. Under poor drainage conditions / anaerobic conditions many organic and inorganic
compounds will be reduced to toxic levels and inhibit crop growth.
8. Denitrification occurs in anaerobic conditions.
9. Some micronutrients will become unavailable.
Lecture 9. Soil biology- Classification of soil microbes
Soil is an ecosystem capable of producing the resources necessary for the development
of the living organisms. The soil is teeming with millions of living organisms which make it a
living and a dynamic system. Under microscope it reveals a complex arrangement of soil
particles and pore spaces filled with air and water. It is in these pore spaces that plant roots and
millions of organisms develop, ranging from microscopic to macroscopic in size. Soil
microorganisms (bacteria and fungi) are responsible for biomass decomposition, biogenic
element circulation, which makes nutrients available to plants, biodegradation of impurities,
and maintenance of soil structure. The organisms in the soil, not only help in development of
soils but carryout a number of transformations facilitating the availability of nutrients to the
plants. In the absence of the activities of these organisms, in soil, life on earth would have
come to a halt, as all available nutrients would have ended up locked in the organic, disrupting
the nutrient cycles. Greek word Bios= life, logos=study
The study of living organisms in soil is called Soil biology.
Biomass: Weight of the organisms per unit weight of soil is known as biomass
Factors affecting microbial activity and growth
1. Type and quantity of organic matter added to soil
2. Physical and chemical properties of soil
3. Environmental factors (Temperature, Rainfall)
4. Crops grown (Cereals, Pulses)
5. Indiscriminate use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides
6. Lack of proper drainage system
Classification of soil organisms:
Soil Organisms
Soil flora (Plant kingdom) Soil fauna (Animal kingdom)
Micro-flora Macro-flora Micro fauna Macro-fauna: Earth-
Eg: Pl ant Eg: worm s, Termites, Ants,
roots, Macro
Protozoa, Grubs, Slugs, Snails,
algae
namatodes Centipedes, Millipedes
Bacteria Actinimycetes, Fungi Algae: BGA,
a Streptomyces Diatoms
IMPORTANT SOIL ORGANISMS
1. Bacteria: Bacteria are single cell/unicellular organisms. They are known for rapid
proliferation. They adjust quickly to changes in environment. Size will seldom exceed 4-5 μm
(length). Shape may be round, rod like or spiral. In the soil, the rod shaped ones seem to
predominate Bacterial population vary from few billion to three trillion in each kilogram of
soil.
2. Fungi: Like bacteria and actinomycetes, fungi contain no chlorophyll. They are longer than
bacteria and heterotrophic in nature (Saprophytic in nature). Fungi are broadly grouped in to
yeasts, molds and mushrooms, out of which molds and mushrooms are important in soils.
3. Actinomycetes: Thread / Filamentous bacteria. Next to bacteria in abundance. A common
genus is streptomyces. Actinomyctes helps in for decomposition of resistant components of
plants and animals.
4. Algae: Chlorophyll containing organism. Aerobic, Photoautotrophic Ex:- Blue green algae
(Anabaena, Nostoc, Oscillatoria, Tolypothrix etc)
CLASSIFICATION OF SOIL MICROORGANISMS
soil microorganisms classified into different groups.
i) Photoautotroph
1. Based on nutrition and energy iiI) Chemoautotroph
iii) Heterotroph
i) Photoautotroph: The source of energy of these microorganisms is Sunlight and source
of nutritive carbon from CO and organic matter.
2
ii) Chemoautotroph: The source of energy of these microorganisms is oxidation of
inorganic substances and source of nutritive carbon from CO .
2
iii) Heterotroph: The source of energy and source of nutritive carbon from CO .
2
i) Aerobic
2. Based on nutrition and energy iiI) Anaerobic
iii) Facultative Anaerobic
i) Psychrophiles – <10oC
3. Based on temperature iiI) Mesophiles – 20 to 40 oC
iii) Thermophiles - >40 oC
4. Based on pH i) Acidophiles
iiI) Alkaliphiles
5. Based on relation ship i) Symbiotic association
iiI) Non-symbiotic association
Lecture. 10. Role of beneficial microorganisms in various
processes of soil- Harmful microorganisms in soil
Importance/Role of Microorganisms
1. Formation of humus through organic matter decomposition
O.M  humus
2. Supplies nutrients to plants in a readily available form
3. Inorganic nitrogen transformations NH4+  NO - Ex: Nitrozomonas and Nitrobactor
3
Urea
Urease
- Amides
Aminase
Ammonia
Nitrogenase (Nitrosomonas)
Nitrite
Nitrobacter
Nitrate
4. Nitrogen fixation Ex: Rhizobium, Azatobactor, Azospirillum
5. Solubilisation of insoluble phosphorous compounds Ex: Bacillus and Pseudomonas
6. Solubilisation of insoluble Sulphur
S oxidizing and reducing organisms S So 2- and SO 2- - S
4 4
Ex: Thiobacillus, Desuphovibrio and Desulphomaculam
7. Formation and development of soil
8. Production of soil enzymes, growth promoting substances and antibiotics
9. Detoxification of soil pollutants
10. Protect plant roots from invasion by soil parasites and pathogens.
Denitrification: Denitrification process is defined as the microbial reduction of nitrate and
nitrite with the release and loss of molecular nitrogen, in some substances of NO .
2
Harmful activities of soil organisms
 However, some soil organisms are detrimental or harmful to plant production. Many
species of insects or mites attack plants. For example ants, aphids and phytophagous
nematodes can be serious pests, and some micro-
organisms, bacteria and actinomycetes cause plant diseases.
 Rodents, snails, slugs, termites, insect larvae a nd nematodes cause great · damage to
plants
 Mainly fungi, but bacteria and actinomycetes, also, are responsible for many soil borne
diseases of crop plants.
 Offer lot of competition to higher plants in utilizing the soil available nutrients,
particularly in the presence of carbon sources in the soil.
 Under conditions of poor drainage, depletes the available oxygen and hampers the
normal growth of plants.
 Under anaerobic conditions, bacteria transform some of the nutrients to unavailable
form (k & Zn etc.) and some nutrients to be available in toxic levels ( Fe & Mn etc.).
Lecture. 11 Soil organic matter- Various sources -
Compounds in plant residues - Their
decomposability
Soil Organic Matter
Sources of soil organic matter:- The original source of soil organic matter is plant
tissue (leaves, roots and left outs of harvested crops). Animals are the secondary sources of
organic matter (their bodies when their life cycles are consummated)
Decomposability of Plant Residues
Different organic residues (plants and animals) contain different groups of organic
compounds. So, different groups of compounds have their different ease of decomposition.
Lignin, fats, waxes increasing rate of crude proteins, simple proteins
Cellulose and hemicelluloses sugars, sugars, starches, etc
(very slowly decomposed) decomposition (rapidly decomposed)
Organic Matter Decomposition
When fresh organic materials (plants and animals) are incorporated in to the soil, three
separate processes occur simultaneously as follows:
1. Plant and animal tissue constituents disappear under the influence of microbial enzymes
undergoes enzymatic oxidation and new biological tissue, new microbial cells are formed
bringing about an increase in soil of proteins, polysaccharides and nucleic acids along with
energy and heat as the major products etc.
2. Breakdown of so formed organic compounds (according to their ease of decomposition) by
different groups of microorganisms and release of different essential plant nutrients like N,
P, S, etc. into the soil or immobilization may take place by a series of specific reactions.
3. Compounds very resistant to microbial actions are formed either through modification of
compounds in the original plant tissue or by microbial synthesis.
The native flora of soil i.e. bacteria, fungi and actinomycetes are involved in the decomposition
of organic matter. Different soil enzymes (protein substances) produced by these
microorganisms are directly responsible for the decomposition by reducing the activation
energy, necessary to breakdown the bonds of different organic materials.
An enzyme is a substance, composed of proteins that are capable of lowering the
activation energy of other selective compounds enough to allow the breaking of a particular
bond under a particular environment.
The action of enzyme to make a split easier does not use up the enzyme. An activator
that is not consumed or changed by such a process is called catalyst. Many different enzymes
are produces by a single organism and many organisms produce the same enzyme.
The simple end products of decomposition of organic matter under aerobic soil
situations are CO , NH +, NO -, H PO -, SO 2-, H O, resistant residues and various other
2 4 3 2 4 4 2
essential plant nutrients like Ca2+, Mg2+, Fe2+, Mn2+, Zn2+, Cu2+ etc.,.
Under anaerobic conditions the end products are CH (swamp gas), some organic acids
4
(R-COOH) eg. lactic, propionic and butyric acid etc., NH4+, various amine residues (R-NH ),
2
toxic gas H S and ethylene (H C=CH ) and the resistant humus substance.
2 2 2
Mineralization: Mineralization is the conversion of an element from an organic form to an
inorganic as a result of microbial decomposition. The heterogeneous group of heterotrophic
soil micro-organisms takes part in mineralization of organic nitrogen and converts it to
inorganic nitrogen.
Aminification: Process of conversion of proteins to amino acids and amines
Enzymatic reaction Enzymatic hydrolysis
Protein    Polypeptides    Amino acids, Amines + CO + Energy
2
Ammonification: Process of conversion of amino acids to ammonia.
Enzymatic hydrolysis
RNH + HOH    NH + R – OH + Energy
2 3
NH + H O   NH + + OH- or NH + H CO   2NH + + CO 2-
3 2 4 3 2 3 4 3
Nitrification: The biological oxidation of NH + released by the process of ammonification
4
to nitrate is known as nitrification. It is a two step process in which NH + is first converted to
4
nitrite (NO -) and then to nitrate (NO -). Conversion to nitrite is brought about largely by a
2 3
group of obligate autotrophic bacteria known as Nitrosomonas as
2 NH + + 3 O 2 NO - + 2 H O + 4H+
4 2 2 2
The conversion from nitrite to nitrate is affected by Nitrobacter as follows:
2 NO - + O 2 NO -
2 2 3
Immobilization: The conversion of the element from the inorganic to the organic form in
microbial tissues or in plant tissues, thus rendering the element not readily available to other
organisms or to plants, is called immobilization.
Lecture 11. Carbon : Nitrogen ratio- Significance of C:N
ratio in soil fertility
Nitrogen is more important nutrient for crop growth along with Carbon, PH , Oxygen.
 Nitrogen occurs in soils mainly in the form of nitrate (NO3-) and Ammonium (NH4+)
ions. It is known to be a very mobile element circulated between the atmosphere, the
soil and living organisms.
 C:N ratio is the intimate relationship between organic matter and nitrogen contents of
soil. The ratio of the weight of organic carbon to the weight of total nitrogen in a soil
or organic material is known as C:N ratio.
 In general, the C:N ratio of humus is 10:1 to 12:1
 It is usually found that most of the applied fresh organic materials in soils carry large
amounts of carbon with relatively very small amounts of total nitrogen.(100:1)
 Large amount of fresh organic materials like crop residues, animal and human
wastages, organic materials having wide C:N ratio(100:1) are incorporated into the
soil under favourable soil conditions for decomposition. A rapid change will found.
The heterotrophic micro-organisms, bacteria, fungi and actinomycetes become active
and increases their population with the production of large amount of CO .
2
 Under, these conditions, nitrate nitrogen (NO -N) disappears from the soil because of
3
the urgent needs by the micro-organisms. And for the time being, little or no nitrogen
is available to plants.
 As the decomposition proceeds, the C:N ratio of the organic materials decreased with
the loss of carbon and conservation of nitrogen.
The quantity of carbon declines with the advancement of decomposition process.
Similarly, the inorganic element released during mineralization process is also lost, by several
means i.e. plant utilization, leaching, volatilization, conversion to insoluble compounds etc.,. It
results in a stabilized C:N ratio to the soil i.e. 10:1 or 12:1(Humus) in which nutrients released
(Mineralization) and readily available to plants.
Mineralization: The conversion of organic forms of C, N, P and S to inorganic or mineral
forms as a result of microbial decomposition is called Mineralization. The heterogeneous group
of heterotrophic soil micro-organisms takes part in mineralization of organic nitrogen and
converts it to inorganic nitrogen. The reactions go uninterrupted, as long as carbon source is
available for microbes. C : N ratio < 20:1
Enzymatic reaction Enzymatic Hydrolysis
Proteins Peptones, Peptides Aminoacids
S o m e a r e h ighly
susceptible to
Some are
d e c omposition initial
resistant to
breakdown
decomposition
deaminization
(oxidative and
reductive)
Immobilization: The conversion of the inorganic forms of those elements to the organic
form in microbial tissues or in plant tissues, thus rendering the element not readily available to
other organisms or to plants, is called immobilization. C : N ratio > 30:1
Significance of C: N ratio in Soil Fertility
1. C : N ratio determines the microbial activity and their proliferation
2. C:N ratio of organic residues determines the rate of decomposition of organic residues.
3. C : N ratio determines the net availability of nutrients to plan
4. The supply of nitrogen, phosphorus and sulphur are largely determined by C:N ratio of
organic residues.
C:N ratios of some organic materials
Material C:N ratio
Sewage, Sludge 5-14 : 1
Microbial tissues 6-12 : 1
Soil Humus 10-12 : 1
Legume residues and green manures 13-25 : 1
Cereal residues and straws 60-80 : 1
Forest Wastes 150-500 : 1
Lecture.13 Humus- its importance on soil
properties- Care and management of soil
humus
SOIL HUMUS
Humus is a complex and rather resistant mixture of brown or dark brown amorphous
and colloidal organic substances that results from microbial decomposition and synthesis and
has chemical and physical properties of great significance to soils and plants.
Soil humus, the complex array of substances left after extensive chemical and biological break
down of fresh plant and animal residues, makes up 60-70% of the total organic carbon in soil.
IMPORTANCE OF HUMUS
Influence of Humus / Organic matter on soil physical, biological and chemical properties
1. Imparts dark color to soils
2. Supplies polysaccharides for binding soil particles for formation of aggregates (genesis of
good soil structure)
3. Increases infiltration rate of water and provides better drainage
4. Increases water holding capacity
5. Reduces plasticity, cohesion, stickiness etc in clay soils
6. Reduces bulk density, there by influence porosity favorably
7 .Through granulation, reduces wind erosion losses
8. Provides mulching (raw organic matter) and lowers soil temperature during summer. Acts as
an insulator and retards heat movement between atmosphere and soil
9 .Reduces alkalinity in soils by releasing organic acids and CO2
10. With high adsorption capacity, it accounts for 30 -90% of the adsorbing power of mineral
soils (Carboxylic group – 54% ; phenolic & enolic groups – 36%; imide group – 10%)
11. Acts as a buffering agent and reduces the likelihood damage from acids and alkalis.
12. With its solubilising effect, increses the availability of nutrients
13. Acts as a store house for nutrients. Organic matter is the source of 90-95% of nitrogen in
unfertilized soils. Also supplies available P,S and micro nutrients like Fe, Mn, Cu and Zn
etc.
14. Adsorbs temporarily the heavy metal pollutants and cleans the contaminated waters.
15. Serves as a source of energy for macro and micro organisms in soils and helps in
performing various beneficial functions in soils (N - fixation, mineralization etc.)
16. Acts as a chelate and increases the availability of micro nutrients
17. Various organic substances like vitamins, antibiotics and growth promoting substances
namely auxins are produced by different micro organisms during decomposition of organic
matter. Also some fungi-toxins are produced to control diseases.
Lecture 14. Soil colloids- Properties of soil colloids
SOIL COLLOIDS
The colloidal state refers to a two phase system in which one material (or materials) in
a very finely divided state is dispersed through a second. Few examples of the colloidal state –
milk and cheese, clouds and fog, starch, gelatin, rubber, proteins, blood and soil etc.
The rapidly diffusing substances, mostly of crystalline nature in the solid state, are
called crystalloids while starch and proteins are called colloids. Colloidal particles float in a
medium and do not tend to settle. Therefore, colloids are referred to as dispersed systems. The
substance in solution is called dispersed phase, while the medium in which the particles are
dispersed is called the dispersion medium.
Soil particles less than 0.001 mm size possess colloidal properties and are
known as soil colloids. There are four major types of colloids present in soil
1. Layer silicate clays
2. Iron and aluminum oxide clays (sesquioxide clays)
3. Allophane and associated amorphous clays
4. Humus
GENERAL PROPERTIES OF COLLOIDS
1. Shape
2. Size
3. Surface area
4. Electrical charge
5. Adsorption
6. Plasticity
7. Cohesion and Adhesion
8. Swelling & Shrinkage
9. Flocculation & Deflocculation
10. Brownian movement
11. Tyndal effect
12. Non permeability
1. Shape: The mineral colloids are laminated, made up of layers of plates or flakes or even
rods. The different units or flakes of clay minerals are held together with varying degrees of
force depending upon the nature of the clay mineral. The edges of clay minerals are of clean
cut or frayed or fluffy. In all cases clay minerals are developed more in the horizontal axis than
of vertical axis.
Kaolinite-------- Hexagonal crystals
Montmorillonite -- Flakes
Humus------------Variable
Halloysite----- ---Rod shaped
Layer silicate clays, iron and aluminum oxide clays, allophane and associated
amorphous clays are inorganic colloids while humus is an organic colloid. These are in
Crystalline and Amorphous form.
2. Size: The inorganic and organic colloids are extremely small size - smaller than 2
micrometers in diameter (0.001 to 0.2 μ). These particles cannot be seen using an ordinary
light microscope but can be seen only with an electron microscope.
3. Surface Area: The colloids expose a large surface area per unit mass. The external
surface area of one gram of clay colloid is at least 1000 times that of one gram of sand.
Certain silicate clays with expanding plate like makeup offer internal surfaces besides
external surface area. The total surface area of soil colloids ranges from 10m2/g for clays
with only external surfaces to more than 800 m2/g for clays with extensive internal surfaces.
4. Electrical charge: Colloidal particles usually have an electrical charge-some positive
and some negative when clay colloids suspended in water, it carries a negative electric charge
and there by attracts positively charged ions (cations).
5. Adsorption: Adsorption of cations / anions and water is the important consequence of
the charges on colloids. The negatively charged colloids are of practical significance, as they
attract hundreds of thousands of positively charged ions (cations). This gives rise to an ionic
double layer. The adsorption of ions is governed by the type and nature of ion, ion
concentration and the type of colloidal particle.
 Higher is valency, higher the adsorption (excepting H+)
 With same valency, the ion with more atomic weight is preferred.
 Concentration of the ion in the solution also determines the adsorption rate.
6. Plasticity: Soils containing more than 15% of colloidal clay exhibit plasticity . Plasticity
occurs only when soils are moist or wet. Due to this property clay colloids can be molded to
any shape. Plasticity phenomenon is extremely important because it encourages a change in
soil structure which is most related to the tillage operations.
Montmorillonite > Illite > Kaolinite
7. Cohesion and Adhesion: Colloidal clay particles exhibit the properties of cohesion
and adhesion. Due to cohesion force clay particles are able to form aggregates and also due to
adhesive force clay particles envelop sand particles. Both the forces develop in the presence of
water and these two forces help in the retention of water in the soil as well as absorption to the
plants and microorganisms.
8. Swelling and shrinkage: Contraction and expansion in volume of soil with the
variation in moisture are influenced by the presence of colloidal clay particles in soil. Swelling
phenomenon occurs when colloidal clay particles are allowed to be placed in contact with
moisture due to imbibition of water. Whereas shrinkage occurs in dry condition of the soils
containing sufficient amount of colloidal particles and causes decrease in volume with cracks
in variable nature.
Shrinkage and swelling are more pronounced in Montmorillonite clays (expanding 2:1
type) than that of Kaolinite (Non expanding 1:1 type) clays and these phenomenon play a
significant role in the formation of soil structure.
9. Flocculation and Deflocculation:
Aggregation or clumping together of individual, tiny soil particles is called flocculation.
Clay particles by virtue of carrying negative charge on its surface repel each other and disperse
in the medium. When the negative charge is satisfied by cations, which are tightly held on clay
surface, the repulsive forces would be very minimum. It leads to coagulation or flocculation of
soil particles.
The colloidal particles are coagulated by adding an oppositely charged ion. This
process of formation of flocs is known as flocculation. As for example, clay is coagulated by
the use of aluminium (Al3+).this condition is generally beneficial in relation to agriculture since
it is the first step in the formation of stable aggregates or granules. The ability of common
cations to flocculate soil colloids is in the order of,
Al3+>Ca2+> and H+>Mg2+>K+>Na+
Deflocculation is the dispersion of colloidal particles, due to the repulsion of negatively
charged particles. Under deflocculated condition particles move away from each other, and act
independently. Poor physical condition of the soil develops resulting from the dispersion of the
soil colloids which is not desirable.
So the phenomenon of flocculation plays an important role in the field of agriculture by
improving the physical condition as well as other related condition of the soil which is
beneficial for the plant growth.
Ex: Organic matter - flocculation of soil particles
Ca - flocculation of soil particles
Na - dispersion or deflocculation of soil particles
10. Brownian Movement: The continuous rapid zigzag movement executed by a
colloidal particle in the dispersion medium is called Brownian movement or Motion (Robert
Brown, 1927). In a colloid suspension, the colloidal particles are under constant rapid motion.
They move in a short straight line path in the medium and change their path abruptly due to
collision with other colloidal particles or molecules of dispersion medium. The smaller the
particle, the more rapid is its movement and more often does it collide. The Brownian
movement is mainly responsible for the coagulation or flocculation of colloidal particles.
11. Tyndall Effect: The Tyndall Effect is the effect of light scattering in colloidal
dispersion, while showing no light in a true solution. This effect is used to determine whether a
mixture is a true solution or a colloid.
The Tyndall effect is an easy way of determining whether a mixture is colloidal or not. When
light is shined through a true solution, the light passes cleanly through the solution, however
when light is passed through a colloidal solution, the substance in the dispersed phases scatters
the light in all directions, making it readily seen.
Ex: For example, light being shined through water and milk. The light is not reflected when
passing through the water because it is not a colloid. It is however reflected in all directions
when it passes through the milk, which is colloidal.
12. Non- Permeability: Colloids are unable to pass through a semi permeable membrane
and this membrane allows to pass water and other dissolved substances but retains colloidal
materials.
Lecture. 15. Ion exchange in soils – Cation exchange
ION EXCHANGE IN SOILS
Ion exchange is defined as a reversible process by which cations and anions are
exchanged between solid and liquid phases and between solid phases, if in close contact with
each other.
Adsorption is defined as a phenomenon by which an increase in concentration or an
accumulation of an ion on a solid occurs due to ion exchange or other reactions. Desorption is
a phenomenon by which the replacement or release of an adsorbed ion species occurs.
Ion exchange property is almost entirely to the clay and silt fractions and the organic
matter. The soil particles are amphoteric in nature and soil particles have the power to hold
both cations and anions. The charge density and potential are higher on edges and corners and
in furrows and cavities as compared to flat (plane) surfaces and consequently in exchange
phenomena are probably concentrated more in those sites. The exchangeable ions are held to
the surface by coulomb forces and van-der-waal’s forces. In most of the soils the exchangeable
cations are Ca 2+, Mg2+, H+, K+, Na+ and NH4+, of which Ca 2+ is the dominant exchangeable
ion. In strong acid soils Al(OH) + may act as a dominant exchangeable ion. In alkali soil Na+
2
becomes dominant and the most common anion SO 2-, Cl- and HCO - etc.
4 3
Cation Exchange
The process of replacement of cations adsorbed on exchange complex by other cations is
called cation exchange. The reaction of cation exchange takes place rapidly and the inter
change is chemically equivalent. The exchange of cations in the soil takes place between.
1. Cations in the soil solution and those on the exchange complexes of soil (clay crystal and
humus)
2. Cations released by plant roots and those on the exchange complexes of soil.
3. Cation on the surface of either two clay crystals, two organic colloids; or a clay and humus
particle.
All the cations are not adsorbed with equal tenacity, and the exchange complex does
not possess same strength of negative charge at all points. The cation with less size and higher
charge per unit size are held more strongly than other cations.
Power or replacement of cation: H +=Al3+>Ca2+ >Mg2+ > K + = NH4+ > Na+
Lecture. 16. Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC)-Factors
affecting CEC- Importance
Cation Exchange capacity of soils (Thomas Way, 1850)
The sum total of the exchangeable cations that a soil can absorb is known as “Cation
Exchange Capacity” of that soil. It is the amount of exchangeable cations per unit weight of
dry soil. It is measured in mill equivalents of cations per 100 grams of soil (Recently cmol [p+]
kg-1) The mill equivalent is used because the number of negative charge sites in a given sample
does not change, but the weights of cations, that may be adsorbed to those sites at one time do
change because they have different weights.
Importance of CEC
1. The most important reaction in nature after photosynthesis.
2. It is an important reaction in correcting soil acidity and basicity
3. It alters soil physical properties
4. Through cation exchange mechanism (large cation exchanger), the percolating waters will
be purified or altered (Ground water pollution is checked)
5. Plants absorb exchangeable cations by interchange or contact between the root hairs and
colloidal complex
6. The amounts of cations in the soil solution are intimately related to the exchangeable
cations.
7. Offers buffering capacity to soils.
Factors affecting CEC
1. Soils with large amounts of clay and organic matter will have higher cation exchange
capacity. More fine the soil more is the CEC.
2. More humus (Humus = >150 me/100gr) content more is the CEC
3.2:1 clay minerals i.e. Montmorillonite = 100-150 me/100gr have more CEC than 1:1 type
minerals i.e. Kaolinite = 3-15 me/100gr
4. Cation exchange capacity increases with decrease in the size of the particle.
5. In alkaline PH range, CEC would be more. Increase in PH increases Cation exchange
capacity.
6. Liming & Fertilization increases the CEC.
Lecture.17 Anion Exchange capacity (AEC) - Factors
affecting AEC
ANION EXCHANGE CAPACITY OF SOIL
The total amount of exchangeable anions held by a unit mass of soil, is termed as its Anion
exchange capacity.
Anion exchange capacities are generally low and increases as the pH decreases or acidity
increases.
Preference of anions for the positive sites
SiO 4 - > PO 3- >> SO 2- > NO3- = Cl-
4 4 4
Factors affecting AEC
1. The capacity for retaining anions increases with a decrease in soil PH
2. AEC increases with the valency of the anion but decreases with increasing valency of the
cation.
3. AEC is much greater in soils high in 1:1 type i.e. Kaolinite = >43 me/100gr clay minerals
and those containing hydrous oxides of iron and aluminium than that of soils containing high
amounts of 2:1 type i.e. Montmorillonite = < 5 me/100gr of clay minerals.
4. Anion exchange generally decreases with increasing salt concentration.
OH - > H PO - >> SO4 2- > NO - = Cl-
2 4 3
5. As the ratio of CEC/A EC of a layer silicate mineral increase, the adsorption of anions
decreases.
6. Acid soils in tropical and sub-tropical regions containing hydrous oxides of Al and Fe
exhibit much higher AEC than alkaline and calcareous young soils of arid and semi-arid
regions.
Lecture.18. Base saturation - buffering capacity-its
importance
BASE SATURATION
The percentage of total CEC satisfied with basic cations is termed base saturation. It is defined
as the extent to which the exchange complex of a soil is saturated with exchangeable cations
other than hydrogen and aluminum and it is expressed as a percentage of the total cation
exchange capacity.
% Base Saturation = m eq of basic cations per g soil x 100
Total CEC in m eq per g soil
The degree of base saturation is an important property of soil which usually reflects the extent
of leaching and weathering of soils. It is an indication of soil fertility. The ease with which
adsorbed cations are released to plants depends on the degree of base saturation.
>80% - Highly fertile soils
50-80% - Medium fertile
<50% - Low fertile
Liming is the common means by which the percent base saturation of soils is increased.
As a general rule, the degree of base saturation of normal cultivated soils is higher for arid than
humid region soils. Also, the degree of base saturation of soils formed from lime stones or
basic igneous rocks is greater than that of soils formed from sand stones or acid igneous rocks.
Soils with larger amounts of organic colloids or 1:1 type clay colloids can supply the
nutrient cations to plants at a much lower degree of base saturation than soils high in 2:1 type
clay colloids.
Kind of adsorbed cations also affects the soil PH. With same base saturation percentage,
the soil dominated by Na+ cation presents higher PH values than the soil dominated by Ca2+ and
Mg2+ cations.
BUFFERING CAPACITY
Buffering capacity is the ability of the soil to resist change. In the case of acidity, it is the
ability of the soil to resist change in PH.
 A higher buffer capacity means that the soil can absorb more acid and/or base without a
significant change in PH. In general, clay soils have higher buffer capacity than sandy
soils, and a higher organic matter content tends to increase buffering capacity.
 Buffering capacity is important because it helps to stabilize the PH. Changes in PH can
affect plants in a variety of ways, especially by diminishing the fraction of nutrients in
soil that are available to the plants and increasing uptake of undesirable minerals like
aluminum.
 The amounts of amendments necessary to affect a given alteration in soil reaction also
relate to the effectiveness of PH stabilization.
Lecture.19 Soil Reaction – pH scale- factors affecting
soil pH
SOIL REACTION
The “Soil Reaction” or “soil PH” describes the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a soil and is
determined by the hydrogen ion (H+) concentration in the soil solution. pH is H+ ion
concentration in soil solution. It indicates weather the soil is acidic, alkaline or neutral.
Soil PH is defined as the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration.
The pH of solution has been defined as negative logarithm of hydrogen ion activity
which in very dilute solution is expressed as g ions L-1 or g mol L-1.
p H = - log [H+] or log (1/H+)
10
[H+] = 10-pH
pH SCALE
The concept of pH was given by Sorensen in 1909. The term pH (pH puissance dehydrogen or
pourvoir hydrogen), which means the power of hydrogen.
The PH scale goes from 0 to 14 and normally falls between 3 and 10 with pH 7 as the
neutral point. As the amount of hydrogen ions in the soil increases the soil PH decreases thus
becoming more acidic.
It is found that in aqueous system at 22oC
[H+] [OH-] = 10-14 Which is called ionic product of water.
i.e., pH + pOH = 14
An acid soil has more H+ than OH- ions, while a basic or alkaline soil has more OH-
than H+ ions.
CLASSIFICATION OF SOILS BASED ON pH
Based on the pH value of soil solution, the soils have been classified into the following
categories.
pH Range Category (Rating)
< 4.5 Extremely acidic
4.6 – 5.0 Very strongly acidic
5.1 – 5.5 Strongly acidic
5.6 – 6.0 Medium acidic
6.1 – 6.5 Slightly acidic
6.6 – 7.5 Neutral
7.5 – 7.8 Mildly alkaline
7.9 – 8.4 Moderately alkaline
8.5 – 9.0 Strongly alkaline
> 9.1 Very strongly alkaline
Factors affecting soil pH
1. The colloidal particles of soil (clay and humus) influence soil reaction to a great extent.
When hydrogen (H+) ion forms the predominant adsorbed cations on soil colloids (clay and
humus) the soil reaction becomes acidic.
5. Soils having low percentage base saturation show acidic reaction. Sodium saturated soils
have much higher PH values than those dominated by calcium and magnesium.
6. Rainfall plays an important role in determining the soil reaction. In general soils formed in
regions of high rainfall are acidic (low PH value) while those formed in low rainfall regions
are alkaline (PH value high).
7. Cultural operations in general tend to increase soil acidity. As a result of constant
cultivation, basic cations are lost from the soil through leaching and crop removal. Besides,
the continual use of fertilizers is also responsible for the changes in soil reaction.
8. Soil formed in regions of high rainfall are acidic (low PH) while those formed in low rainfall
regions are alkaline (high pH).
Lecture 20. Effect of soil reaction on nutrient
availability and plant growth
Soil reaction is the important factor which governs the availability of various nutrients by
influencing the soil properties like physical, chemical and biological etc.
Soil reaction and microbial activity: The activity of microbes is influenced by the
variations in soil pH.
 Bacteria and actinomycetes prefer near neutral to slightly alkaline reaction (pH 6.5 –
8.0). Bacteria resoponsible for conversion of N & S from organic to inorganic are less
active in acidic soil.
 Fungi work satisfactorily at all pH ranges. They face a large competition at higher pH
values with bacteria and actinomycetes. Hence they grow better in acidic reaction of pH
between 4.5 to 6.5.
Nitrogen: Plants absorb nitrogen in the form of NO-3 whose formation depends on the
ability of nitrifying bacteria. nitrification slowsdown below pH 5.5. The microbes responsible
for nitrification are active when the soil pH is between 6.5 to 7.5. Nitrogen fixing bacteria also
fail to function below a soil pH of 6.0.
Phosphorus: Phosphorus availability is high when soil pH is between 6.0 to 7.5.
 At pH values less than 5.0, soluble phosphates are fixed as complex and insoluble
compounds of Fe, Al and Mn.
 At pH values of more than 7.5, complex insoluble calcium phosphates like apatites.
 Excess calcium also hinders the phosphorus absorption and utilisation by the plants.
Calcium, magnesium potassium: Become deficient due to their leaching.
Sulphur: The bacteria responsible for the oxidation of sulphides to sulphates can function
satisfactorily at all pH values.
Micronutrients: The availability of micronutrients like zinc, iron, copper and manganese
are more in the acidic range. Under acidic conditions as in the humid regions because of high
rainfall due to leaching of bases, aluminium, iron and micro nutrients become toxic. They are
more soluble at low pH. At a soil pH of less than 5.5, aluminium starts to leave the structure of
silicate clays. High levels of soluble aluminium are injurious to crops. Aluminium toxicity
increases water stress during dry period. The availability of molybdenum increases under
alkaline condition.
Lecture. 21. Problem soils: Units of expression for
salinity and alkalinity - Characteristics of Acid,
Saline, Saline Sodic, Sodic and Calcareous soils-
Formation and Nutrient availability in problem
soils
PROBLEM SOILS
The ‘problem soil’ herein means the soil that has agricultural problems due to the soil’s
unsuitable physical and chemical properties, or less suitable for cultivation, resulting in that
crops are not able to grow and produce yields as normal.
1. Acid Soils
2. Salt affected soils
3. Less Water and Nutrient Retention capacity soils
4. Less drainage facility soils
1. ACID SOILS
Acid soil is a base unsaturated soil which has got enough of adsorbed exchangeable H+ ions
so that to give soil a PH of lower than 6.5.
Soils with pH < 5.5 have been defined as acid soils by USDA. However, soils with pH < 6.5
can also be categorized as acidic soils. The following important sources which are responsible
for the development of acidic soils.
Sources of Acidity
1. Soils which are developed from Acidic Parent material
2. Leaching of basic elements (Ca, Mg) due to heavy Rainfall
3. Excess application of Acid forming fertilizers and soluble salts
4. Excess moisture condition
5. Acid rains
6. Humus and other organic acids
7. Podzolization: The major process involved in the formation of acid soils is podzolization in
areas of temperate climate.
The Acidity and Alkalinity of the soil has been indicated by soil PH
S.No. PH Acidity
1. <4.5 Extremely acid
2. 4.6-5.0 Very strongly acid
3. 5.1-5.5 Strongly acid
4. 5.6-6.0 Moderately acid
5. 6.0-6.5 Slightly Acid
6. 6.6-7.0 Neutral
Nutrient Availability in Acid Soils
Low pH, high exchangeable H+ and Al3+, low CEC and high base unsaturation are the
characteristics of acid soils. Adverse effect is due to toxic concentration of Al, Mn and Fe and
deficiency of Ca and Mg. Acid soils are low in available P and have high P fixing capacity.
Available micronutrient status is adequate except molybdenum. The population of bacteria and
actinomycetes is lower and those of fungi higher.
Management of Acid Soils
Acid soils can be managed by either growing crops suitable for particular soil pH or by
ameliorating the soils through the application of amendments which will counteract soil
acidity. Acid soils are made more suitable for agricultural use by liming which raises the soil
pH. Liming increases the exchangeable base status, influences nutrient uptake, reduces toxic
concentration of aluminium and manganese by neutralizing effect, improves the soil structure
and promotes root distribution.
Liming Materials
1. Calcium Carbonate (CaCO )
3
2. Calcium Magnesium Carbonate (CaCO MgCO )
3 3
3. Calcium Oxide (CaO)
4. Calcium Hydroxide (Ca (OH ))
2
5. Basic Slag
Precautions - during liming:
1.The amount of finer fraction of liming materials will be required much less as compared to
coarser fractions of the material to achieve a certain PH. Liming material should be in powder
farm, so that liming reaction can occur in a faster rate.
2. Lime should be applied well ahead of the crop cultivation and broadcasted limes are to be
well mixed with the whole plough layer soil so that liming reaction can occur in a faster
rate.
3. Application of lime of no till field soils may not be as effective as application to an
equivalent cultivated soil.
4. During liming the field should be in wet condition for proper utilization of liming material.
5.The application of 3-6 tones/acre of lime of strongly acid soils has been found to be most
effective.
2. SALT EFFECTED SOILS
Soluble salts in these soils are predominant with chlorides and sulphates of sodium, calcium
and magnesium. The PH is usually more than 7.
The presence of salt in the soil solution reduces the ability of the seed to germinate, crop
growth and yield.
The responsible factors:
1. Weathering of rocks and minerals: The soluble salts released during weathering leach
down with rain water, but again move upward due to high temperature and accumulate as
white crust forming a saline soil.
2. Hydrolysis of sodium saturated exchange complex in the formation of an alkali soil:
Sodium carbonate undergoes hydrolysis to form sodium hydroxide, which dissociates to
increase concentration of hydroxyl ions in soil solution.
3. Salty underground water: If the ground water is salty, the salts move upward with water
and get deposited when water evaporates.
4. Arid and semi arid climate: The low rainfall is not sufficient to leach down the soluble
weathered products and hence the salts accumulate in the soil.
5. Quality of irrigation water: If water contains excessive amounts of Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, Cl-,
HCO -, CO =, BO = their continuous application develops salt affected soils. Besides this, a
3 3 3
rise in the groundwater level, poor drainage which prevents leaching of salts and
continuous use of bad quality irrigation water lead to the secondary salinisation and
alkalisation.
6. Use of basic fertilizer: Basic fertilizers like NaNO and basic slag may develop soil
3
alkalinity.
7. Ocean or Sea water
8. Imperfect or poor drainage conditions
9. Old lake bottoms
10. Alluvial deposits along the sea coasts
The ground water containing high salts moves in an upward direction by capillary
action. The water on evaporation leaves the salts behind, which accumulate at the surface or at
some depth depending upon the capillary fringe. Surface accumulation of salts gives white
appearance to soils. Hence the soils are called as white alkali soils. These soils can be managed
by leaching of salts followed by provision of sub-surface drainage.
In 1954, the US Salinity Laboratory Staff grouped salt affected soils into 3 classes
A) Saline soils
B) Alkali soils.
C) Saline Alkali soils.
Units of expression for salinity and alkalinity:
1. Electrical Conductivity (EC): Salinity is measured in terms of electrical
conductivity (EC) which is the ability of salt solution to conduct electricity. It is expressed in
terms of deci Siemens per metre (dS m-1).
Salinity Class EC (dSm-1)
Salinity effect negligible : 0 – 2
Yield of very sensitive crops restricted : 2 - 4
Yield of many crops restricted : 4 - 8
Only tolerant crop yields are satisfactory : 8 – 16
Yield of a few tolerant crops are satisfactory : > 16
Critical value for EC : 4
2. Exchangeable Sodium Percentage (ESP): It is defined as percentage of CEC
occupied by Na. Sodium is involved in alkalinity. It is expressed in terms of exchangeable
sodium percentage (ESP) that is the degree of saturation of exchangeable complex with sodium
and sodium adsorption ratio (SAR).
Exchangeable Na [c mol (p+) kg-1)]
ESP = ---------------------------------------------- x 100
CEC [c mol (p+) kg-1)]
3. Sodium Adsorption Ratio (SAR): This is relative proportion of Na with respect to
Ca and Mg in the soil solution.
SAR =
C a 2
N

a

2

M g 2 
Characteristics of salt affected soils
AA.. Saline Soils
A.
It is the process of accumulation of salts such as Sulphates, Chlorides of Calcium, Magnesium,
A.
Sodium and Potassium in soils in the form of salty (salic) horizon. As a result of the
A.
accumulation of salts, solon chalks or saline soils develop with an electrical conductivity of
A.
> 4 dSm-1. The soils are called saline soils, which have ESP less than15 per cent and pH
A.
between 7and 8.5. Because of the presence of excess salts and low amount of Na+, these soils
A.
Aar.e in a flocculated state and their permeability is higher than alkali soils.
A.
Their physical condition is good and water can pass through them. These soils have a
A.
white crust of salts on their surface. Salinisation refers to the accumulation of neutral soluble
A.
salts in soils.
A.
AB. Alk ali Soils
A.
The process involves the accumulation of sodium ions on the exchange complex of the clay to
A.
an extent of >15%, resulting in the formation of sodic soils (solonetz) under arid and semi-arid
A.
conditions. This occurs when anions like carbonates and bicarbonates predominate in soil. The
A.
Aca.l cium and magnesium in soil solution will precipitate as corresponding carbonates or
Abi.c arbon ate whenever the ionic product of solution exceeds the solubility products of
Are.s pecti ve carbonates. This reduces the concentration of Ca and Mg in soil solution, there by
A
re
.
l easin g them from exchange complex. As this process continues, the sodium concentration
A.
A.
A.
A.
A.
on exchangeable complex increase. When the ESP in soils exceeds 15 %, the soil is designated
as alkali soil with a high pH of >8.5, which results in less nutrient availability.
Such soils are not in a good physical condition and the surface of these soils is
sometimes black due to dispersion of organic matter and humus. Such soils if ploughed when
wet, turn into slick furrow slice referred to as slick spots.
C. Saline Alkali soils:
These soils form as a result of the combined process of salinization and alkalinization. These
soils are both saline and non-saline alkali soils. It is a stage of transition.
Affected soil with a content of exchangeable sodium greater than 15, with much soluble salts,
and with a pH value usually less than 8.5.
They are transitional soils that they may be converted into saline or into sodic soils.
These soils have both soluble salts and exchangeable sodium. The soil reaction becomes
strongly alkaline because of hydrolysis of exchangeable sodium. The physical condition of the
soil is deteriorated
Comparison of characteristics of salt affected soils
Characteristic Saline soil Alkali soil Saline - alkali
Content in soil Excess soluble salts of Presence of excess These are transition
calcium, magnesium and exchangeable sodium soils. They contain
sodium on the exchange sodium saturation and
complex excess soluble salts
Dominant cation Exchangeable calcium Exchangeable sodium ---
Dominant salts Sulphates, chlorides and Sodium carbonate and
nitrates of calcium, bicarbonate
magnesium and sodium
Colour White Black ---
SAR <13 >13 >13
ESP <15 >15 >15
Soil pH <8.5 >8.5 ~8.5
EC >4 dS m-1 <4 dS m-1 >4 dS m-1
Total soluble salt >0.1 % <0.1% >0.1%
content
Physical Flocculated, permeable Deflocculated, Flocculated or
condition of the to water and air permeability to water deflocculated
soil and air is poor.
Morphological White crust on the High amounts of ---
character surface exchangeable sodium
leads to dispersion of
the clay, which
together with humates
may form dark
colored soil
Organic matter Slightly less than normal Very low Variable
content soil
Nutrient availability in saline and alkali soils:
Saline soil: Presence of excessive quantities of salts in saline soils result in an increase in
osmotic pressure of soil solution (osmotic effect). This results in the movement of water from
plant cell into the more concentrated soil solution. This inhibits uptake of water and nutrients
into the plant cell.
Alkali soils: Alkali soils adversely affect plant growth in many ways.
 Such soils are in poor physical condition. The presence of high Na+ keeps the soil
particles suspended.
 Soils contain excessive amounts of boron, bicarbonates and sodium.
 Active sodium ions interfere with plant nutrition and metabolism. It adversely affects
Ca2+ and Mg2+ nutrition of plants.
 Due to high pH, availability of phosphorus and micronutrients becomes low; the soils
encounter Fe, Cu, Zn and Mn deficiencies.
 Plant suffers oxygen deficiency as soil structure is adversely affected due to the
dominance of sodium.
CALCAREOUS SOILS
Calcareous soils are soils in which a high amount of calcium carbonate dominates the
problems related to agricultural land use. They are characterized by the presence of calcium
carbonate in the parent material and by a calcic horizon, a layer of secondary accumulation of
carbonates (usually Ca or Mg) in excess of 15% calcium carbonate equivalent and at least 5%
more carbonate than an underlying layer.
Main Production Constraints
Calcareous soils develop in regions of low rainfall and must be irrigated to be productive.
1. The main production constraints are the availability of water for irrigation. The quality
of the irrigation water is of crucial importance for sustainable agricultural production
on calcareous soils.
2. Crusting of the surface may affect not only infiltration and soil aeration but also the
emergence of seedlings.
3. Cemented conditions of the subsoil layers may hamper root development and water
movement characteristics.
4. Calcareous soils tend to be low in organic matter and available nitrogen.
5. The high pH level results in unavailability of phosphate i.e. P fixation (formation of
unavailable calcium phosphates as apatite)
6. Reduced micronutrient availability, e.g. zinc and iron (lime induced chlorosis).
7. They may also potassium and magnesium nutrition due to nutritional imbalance
between these elements and calcium.
Management
 Addition of copious amounts of organic matter which release organic acids during
decomposition for solubilising CaCO and to release the fixed P.
3
 Regular application of ZnSO @ 25 – 50 kg ha-1
4
 Application of phosphatic fertilisers by Placement method to overcome the problem of
P fixation.
 Foliar application of micronutrients in their respective sulphate form.
LESS WATER AND NUTRIENT RETENTION CAPACITY SOILS
The utilization of Silty soil deposited from organic fertilizers, Ponds and check dams will
improve the Water and nutrient retention capacity of soil.
LESS DRAINAGE FACILITY SOILS
 Application of Organic fertilizers
 Provide drainage facility, for easy flow of water through ponds
Lecture. 22 Reclamation of Problematic Soils –
Mechanical, Chemical and Biological methods
RECLAMATION OF SALT AFFECTED SOILS:
Before proceeding for reclamation of salt affected soils, the following points should be
considered and available information should be collected with regard to
i) Nature and extent of salinity.
ii) Quality of irrigation water with respect to sodium, boron and bicarbonate and
It’s salt content.
iii) Drainage conditions.
iv) Nature and distribution of salts in the root zone.
v) Calcium carbonate content of the soil.
I. MECHANICAL AMELIORATION OF SALT AFFECTED SOILS:
The commonly followed physical or mechanical method of amelioration of salt affected
soils include deep ploughing, sub soiling, sanding, profile inversion and scraping.
 Deep ploughing and sub soiling break the impermeable layer, hard pan or cemented sub
soil layer existing at various depths in soil profile to improve the internal drainage of the
soil and to facilitate the transportation of salts dissolved in water to deeper layers.
 Incorporation of sand in salt affected soils is done to bring about permanent changes in
texture, increase permeability and to improve water relations in the root zone.
 Profile inversion can be adopted only under conditions where surface soil is good but the
soil below is sodic or saline.
 Scraping is adopted to remove the few centimeters of salt encrustation.
II. CHEMICAL AMELIORATION:
A. Reclamation of a saline soil (Leaching): The main objective in reclamation of these soils
is to leach the salts below the root zone (hence, drainage system should be installed if
necessary).
Leaching requirement (LR): It has been defined as that fraction of water that must be leached
through the root zone to control soil salinity at a specified level.
This is achieved by flooding and draining. To make it effective, bunds are raised
around plots prepared and water is applied depending on their water requirement to leach salts.
Leaching requirement (LR) = ECaw / EC dw
ECaw is the EC of applied water.
ECdw is the EC of drainage water.
B. Reclamation of alkali (Sodic) soil: Reclamation of sodic soils involves two stages. First,
the replacement of sodium by another cation and second, the leaching of the desorbed sodium
salts out of the root zone. This may be done with gypsum (CaSO . 2 H O) and leaching with
4 2
good quality irrigation water.
2 Na – X + Ca2+ (solution) → Ca – X + 2 Na+ (solution)
Where X is the soil exchange complex
Gypsum requirement: Gypsum requirement is the calculated amount of gypsum necessary to
add to reclaim the soil. It is the amount of gypsum required to be added to a sodic soil to lower
its ESP (Exchangeable Sodium Percentage) to a desired level.
ESP (initial) – ESP (final) x CEC
Gypsum requirement = --------------------------------------------
(me of Ca/ 100 soil) 100
ESP (Initial) is the ESP of soil before application of gypsum
ESP (Final) is the ESP of soil after bringing it to desired level.
2 NaHCO + CaSO  CaCO + Na SO + CO
3 4 3 2 4 2
Na CO + CaSO  CaCO + Na SO
2 3 4 3 2 4
Micelle ] Na + CaSO  Micelle] Ca + Na SO
4 2 4
This should be followed by application of good quality water to leach salts. Rate of
gypsum application depends on soil pH and the amount of exchangeable sodium present on the
soil exchangeable complex. Gypsum is suitable for alkali soils upto a pH of 9.0.
Elemental sulphur or pyrites are effective on alkali soils which are calcareous (contain
calcium carbonate) in nature
2 S + 3 O  2 SO (microbial oxidation)
2 3
2 SO + 3 H O  2 H SO
3 2 2 4
H SO + CaCO + H O  CaSO . 3 H O + CO
2 4 3 2 4 2 2
H SO produced also reduces soil pH.
2 4
III. BIOLOGICAL AMELIORATION
Organic materials and the activity of plant roots improve biological activity in the soil. During
the decomposition of organic materials CO is released which forms carbonic acid thus
2
dissolving calcium compounds. This can be accomplished by greenmanuring, incorporation of
crop residues, application of FYM, pressmud and other organic materials.
Green manure crop is to be raised and incorporated at flowering stage into the soil immediately
after reclamation. Rice crop is preferred to be grown after the green manure crop owing to its
high tolerance to soil sodicity.
METHODOLOGY OF RECLAMATION
Saline soils
 Saline soils cannot be reclaimed by chemical amendments, conditioners or fertilizers.
 A field can only be reclaimed by removing salts from the plant root zone. In some
cases, selecting salt-tolerant crops may be needed in addition to managing soils.
 There are three ways to manage saline soils.
 First, salts can be moved below the root zone by applying more water than the plant
needs. This method is called the leaching requirement method.
 The second method, where soil moisture conditions dictate, combines the leaching
requirement method with artificial drainage.
 Third, salts can be moved away from the root zone to locations in the soil, other than
below the root zone, where they are not harmful. This third method is called managed
accumulation.
Alkali soils
 Application of organic or chemical amendments
 Amendments mobilize divalent cations for the replacement of sodium from the
exchangeable complex.
 Gypsum is most commonly used.
 Gypsum should be broadcast & incorporated in the surface 0-10cms by discing or by
using cultivar.
 Use of gypsum: In water containing excess of sodium (when RSC > 4 me L-1),
gypsum can be successfully used.
 With the addition of gypsum, the adverse effects of sodium can be mitigated.
 Gypsum can be applied by
a) Keeping gypsum lumps or powdered gypsum in bags in small tanks constructed at
the mouth of the tube well or water passage.
 b) Application of gypsum @ 2 tones ha-1 for each irrigation
 c) A saturated solution of gypsum may be added at a constant rate to the flowing water.
 Due to the reaction that occurs as
 2 Na CO + CaSO Ca CO + Na SO
2 3 4 3 2 4
Leachable
 Na SO being soluble can be leached.
2 4
 Water containing toxic amounts of boron can be reduced by mixing with gypsum.
Sodium borate is converted to calcium borate which being soluble can be leached out of
root zone.
Saline alkali soils
 Saline - sodic soils must be treated as sodic soils first.
 These soils require calcium to correct a sodium problem, followed by leaching to
remove salts.
 Sodium must be made soluble in a saline-sodic soil before the soil is leached with clean
(low-salt) irrigation water.
 If salts are leached with clean water while sodium is insoluble, the result may be a sodic
soil.
 It is extremely important to know how much of a sodium problem exists before
applying clean irrigation water to leach salts.
 High EC irrigation water and soil helps maintain soil structure, increase water
infiltration, and prevent sodium from dominating soil characteristics.
 However, except for its positive effect on soil structure, high EC (salt) irrigation water
is not beneficial for crop production.
 Many of these soils are the result of natural events, and no amount of reclamation will
return them to a satisfactory level of productivity.
 Under these conditions, use tolerant vegetation (e.g., pasture) to maintain soil cover.
Lecture. 23 Important soil groups of India; Alluvial
soils, Black soils, Red soils, Laterite soils and
Coastal sands
India has a geograpghical area of 329 mha and the major soil groups are
1. ALLUVIAL SOILS: Extent: 75 mha
Salient features: Texture is variable. Coarser near source & finer in proximity to the sea
(delta) Fluvial in nature, stratified which is reflected in their texture and OM distribution.
 Colour depends on parent material
 Depth depends on geographic position,
 Calcium carbonate content is variable
 Mostly alkaline (aridic & ustic SMR) or acidic (udic SMR only) in reaction.
 Profile development is variable A – C to A -B-C profiles
 Inherently rich in nutrients – fairly sufficient in P and K but deficient in N and OM.
Potentialities: River alluviums and deltaic alluviums are best agricultural soils. Wheat,
rice, sugarcane and other crops can be grown well
Constraints: Stratification restricts leaching and drainage Extreme sandy nature that
promotes excessive leaching of water and plant nutrients Hydromorphic condition that
promotes reduction and results in poor aeration for plant growth.
 They can be rendered saline where evaporation exceeds rainfall (aridic).
 The river alluviums and deltaic alluviums are becoming waterlogged and salt affected
due to injudicious use of irrigation water.
 Due to intensive use for cultivation, secondary problems are arising like deficiency of S
and Zn.
 Receding ground water and rising ground level in some areas.
Management: Judicious use of I.W & fertilizers. Providing drainage facilities
 Requires drainage facility
 Application of green manure crops are more useful.
 Application of gypsum in small quantities will provide entry of water in to soil and
maintains the soil moisture retention.
 Rice, Turmeric, Sugarcane, Banana, Chilly, Vegetables, Maize and Cotton crops are
grown in this soils.
2. BLACK SOILS: Extent: 74Mha
Salient features:
 Black colour - clay humus complex / titaniferous magnetite,
 30-80%clay (highly argillaceous), clay - clay loam, smectite clay,
 Extremely hard on drying and very sticky and very plastic on wetting
 Because of swell-shrink nature, they develop deep wide cracks, gilgai relief,
slickensides in lower depths due to churning / argillopedoturbation.
 SiO /R O :3 –3.5, high B.D (1.5 – 1.8 Mg m-3) due to compaction in lower layers, high
2 2 3
total pore psace, pH (7.8 - 8.7/9.5), CEC (35 – 55 cmol/kg), BS up to 100%, CaCO (up
3
to 40%), WHC (150 - 250 mm/m)
 Generally low OM. High nutrient hodling capacity.
 Low HC and permeability. Hence ill drained and more runoff.
Constraints:
 Deep black soils: Narrow workable moisture, poor traficcability, high draft power
(heavy soils), low permeability, poor drainage, low HC, High EC and salinity in sub-
soil.
 Micronutrient deficiency in calcareous soils.
Potentialities & Land Use: Inherently fertile, suitable for dry farming, under rainfed
conditions cotton and millets, under irrigation rice, sugarcane etc., can be grown
 Black soils with moderate depth are heavy soils, depth ranging from 60-120 cm occur
in the districts of Adilabad, Nijamabad, Karimnagar, Khammam, Warangal, Medak,
Rangareddy, Mahaboobnagar
 Deep Black cotton soils with depth more than 120 cm occur in the districts of
Mahaboobnagar and Khammam
Management: ICRISAT – Dry season / pre-monsoon sowing, BBF.
3. RED SOILS: Extent: 25 to 30% of GPA of the country. 70Mha
Salient features:
 Red to yellow (hydration & coatings of Fe and Al oxides 30 – 40%), ls to c texture,
Shallow to deep, Low to high clay, kaolinitic / illitic, low WHC & NHC Well to
excessively drained as evident from their colour,
 CN ratio 10:1, pH 6 -7.5,
 CEC low (25–40 cmol/kg of clay) and BS is low to medium,
 SiO /R O :2.5 –3.0, Low nutrient status (O.C, N, P, K, lime)
2 2 3
Constraints: Shallow depth if formed on elevations, soil erosion, sub-surface hardening,
sub-surface ahrd pans, surface crusting, rapid drying, excessive drainage or some times runoff,
high surface soil temperature in dry areas, deficient in OM, N, P Ca. High in Fe O & Al O ,
2 3 2 3
kaolikinite, allophanes - P fixation, though K is sufficient - fast depletion due to continuous
cropping.
Crusting and hardening of red sandy soils (chalkas): Reasons:
 Proportion of clay to sand +silt ratio (3:7) – strenghth 36kg/cm2 on drying
 Presence of free iron oxides which form irreversible bonds with clay fraction
 Sealing pores by rain drops force – dispersion of soil particles.
 Management: tillage with spike roller, pulling thorny bush to break the crust.
 Mulching of seed lines Sowing on the sides of the ridges
 Incorporation of slowly decomposable organic residues – paddy husk, grounut pod
shells, coir pith etc.
Potentialities & Land use: Under good mangement practices, these soils are good for
agricultural, horticultural and plantation crops.
 These occur in the districts of Rangareddy, Mahboobnagar, Medak,
 Deep ploughing of soils once in a three years gives high moisture retention capacity to
soil .
 Application of silt gives good condition to this soil
 Under Rainfed condition Sorghum, Bajra, Redgram, Castor, Groundnt, under irrigation
 Rice can be grown
4. LATERITE SOILS: Extent: 25 Mha
Salient features: Red colour (5YR or redder), highly weathered hence very deep soils,
high clay % (not due to migration but due to in situ alteration), open texture, massive structure,
narrow SiO /R O (<2) ratio , strongly acidic, LAC (<16cmol/kg clay), BS = 40% (low),
2 2 3
kaolinite dominant, low OM
Constraints: High permeability, low AWC, highly leached, Chemically degraded, low
nutrient reserve, deficiency of P, K, Ca, Zn, B etc., Strongly acidic, high P fixation, Al & Mn
toxicity.
Land Use: Generally usaed for plantation crops & shifting cultivation (should be 20 years or
more), In low level areas - rice, banana coconut & high level areas - coffee, cocoa, rubber, tea
are grown
 Generally these have an depth ranging from 45-90 cm
 These soils are commonly found in Medak, Jaheerabad, Narayan khed, Rangareddy,
Vikarabad in Telangana
As laterite soils are acidic, Poor in nutrient status
 Needs incorporation of Farm yard manure, compost, greenmanures to soil
 Requires major and secondary nutrients for crop gowth
 Need to apply more nitrogenous fertilizers
Management: Liming and fertilization (rock phosphates and silicates)
5. COASTAL SANDS:
Salient features: Deep to very deep, Ground water at as depth of 2to 5 mts. Brackish
ground water, Occasionally saline with neutral pH. Sandy texture with neglisible clay content,
Single grain structure. Loose consistence, Light soils. Rapid permeability, excessively drained.
Low WHC and NHC. Low OM, low fertility, low CEC and BS
Land use: Owing to extreme sandy nature, these soils are able to withstand irrigation with
high saline water – Doruvu technology can be followed
 Requires frequent irrigation
 Sprinkler and Drip irrigations are most suitable for this soils
 Practicing of mulching to this soils, gives good results
 Application of organic fertilizers
 Suitable for the growth of Rice and tobacco seedlings and also useful for growing of
Vegetables and flower gardens.
 These soils are favourable for Cashewnut and Casurina orchards.
Constraints: During cyclone periods – these soils are inundated due to tidal over – flow,
Lecture 24. Essential Nutrients for plants- Criteria of
essentiality of nutrients – Classification of
essential nutrients- Forms of nutrients in soil
Plant nutrition is defined as the supply and absorption of chemical compounds required for
plant growth and metabolism. It is the process of absorption and utilization of essential
elements for plant growth and reproduction.
“Nutrients” may be defined as the chemical compounds required by an organism. The
mechanisms by which nutrients are converted to cellular material or used for energetic
purposes are known as ‘ Metabolic Processes’.
The essential nutrient elements required by higher plants are exclusively of inorganic nature.
For an element to be considered an essential plant nutrient, three criteria as proposed by
Arnon and Stout (1939) must be satisfied. These are
1. A deficiency of the element makes it impossible for the plant to complete its life cycle.
2. The deficiency is specific for the element in question.
3. The element is directly involved in the nutrition of the plant as for example as a constituent
of an essential metabolite or required for the action of an enzyme system.
Essential Elements in Plant Nutrition:
Previously there were 16 essential elements for the plant nutrition, but recently the number of
essential elements for plant nutrition has been increased to 20, although more than 90 elements
can be absorbed by plants.
Beneficial Elements:
Beneficial nutrients: These are not included in essential nutrients, but their application
increases the yield up to some extent. Ex: Sodium, Silicon, and Vanadium.
Classification of Essential Nutrients
There are different basis of classification of essential nutrients:
1. Quantity of nutrient required
2. Ionic nature of element
3. Mobility of nutrient in soil
4. Mobility of nutrient with in plant
5. Functions in plant
I. Classification of the essential elements based on the quantity
required by plants
Nutrients are chemical compounds needed for growth and metabolic activities of an
organism. The essential plant nutrients may be divided into macronutrients (primary and
secondary nutrients) and micronutrients depending upon the quantity of nutrient required by
the plant.
A. Macronutrients: Macronutrients or major nutrients are so called because they are
required by plants in larger amounts. These are found and needed in plants in relatively higher
amounts than micronutrients. They include C, H, O, N, P, K, Ca, Mg and S. C, H and O
constitute 90 – 95 per cent of the plant drymatter weight and supplied through CO and water.
2
Remaining six macronutrients are further sub divided into primary and secondary nutrients.
i) Primary nutrients: Nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium are termed as primary
nutrients because of their larger requirement by the plants and the correction of their wide
spread deficiencies are often necessary through the application of commercial fertilisers of
which these are the major constituents.
ii) Secondary nutrients: Calcium, magnesium and sulphur are termed as secondary
nutrients because of their moderate requirement by plants, localised deficiencies and their
inadvertent accretions through carriers of the primary nutrients. For example, the
phosphatic fertiliser, single super phosphate (SSP) contains both Ca and S. Similarly,
ammonium sulphate, a nitrogenous fertiliser also supplements S.
B. Micronutrients: Micronutrient is an element that is required in relatively small
quantities but is as essential as macronutrients. These elements have often been called
trace elements. They are again classified into micronutrient cations and micronutrient
anions depending upon the form in which they are available.
Primary nutrients (N, P, K)
Macronutrients
Secondary nutrients (Ca, Mg, S)
Plant nutrients
Cationic micronutrients Eg: Fe, Mn, Cu, Zn
Micronutrients
Anionic micronutrients Eg: Mo, B, V, Cl, Co
Forms of nutrient elements absorbed by plants
i) Absorbed as single nutrient ion
Nutrient element Forms absorbed by plants
Potassium K+
Calcium Ca2+
Magnesium Mg2+
Iron Fe2+
Manganese Mn2+
Copper Cu2+
Zinc Zn2+
Chlorine Cl-
Silicon Si4+
Cobalt Co2+
Sodium Na+
ii) Absorbed in a combined form
Nutrient element Forms absorbed by plants
Nitrogen Ammonium (NH +) and Nitrate (NO -)
4 3
Phosphorus H PO -, HPO =
2 4 4
Sulphur SO =
4
Boron H BO , H BO -, HBO 2-, BO 3-
3 3 2 3 3 3
Molybdenum MoO = (Molybdate)
4
Carbon CO
2
Hydrogen H O
2
II. Classification on the basis of ionic nature:
1. Cations: K, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu
2. Anions: NO - , H PO -, SO -2
3 2 4 4
3. Metal elements: K, Ca, Mg, Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu
4. Non Metal elements: N, P, S, B, Mo, Cl
III. Classification on the basis of mobility of nutrient in the soil
Mobile nutrients
The nutrients are highly soluble and these are not adsorbed on clay complexes.
Example: NO -, SO 2-, BO 2-, Cl- and Mn+2
3 4 3
Less mobile nutrients
They are soluble, but they are adsorbed on clay complex, so their mobility is reduced.
Example: NH +, K+, Ca+, Mg2+, Cu2+
4
Immobile nutrients
Nutrient ions are highly reactive and get fixed in the soil.
Example: H PO -,HPO 2-, Zn2+
2 4 4
IV. Classification on the basis of mobility with in plant
Highly mobile : N, P and K.
Moderately mobile : Zn
Less mobile : S, Fe, Mn, Cl, Mo and Cu
Immobile : Ca and B
V. Classification on the basis of functions in the plant:
1. Elements that provide basic structure to plant
Ex: Carbon, Hydrogen and Oxygen
2. Elements useful in energy storage, transfer and bonding: These are accessory structural
elements which are more active and vital for living tissues.
Ex: N, S and P.
3. Elements necessary for charge balance.
Ex: K, Ca and Mg.
4. Elements involved in enzyme activation and electron transfer.
Ex: Fe, Mn, Zn, Cu, B, Mo and Cl.
Lecture.25 Functions/Importance, Deficiency
Symptoms and Correction of deficiencies of N,
P, K, Ca, Mg and S
MACRO NUTRIENTS
Functions of N in plants: Cell cytoplasm and organelles contain N in combination with
C, H, O, P and S.
1. It’s an essential component of amino acids, proteins, nucleic acids, porphyrins, flavins,
purines and pyrimidine nucleotides, flavin nucleotides, enzymes, coenzymes and
alkaloids.
2. N containing chlorophyll fixes atmospheric CO2 through photosynthesis.
3. Being a constituent of RNA and DNA, N is responsible for transfer of genetic code.
4. Improves the quality of leafy vegetables and fodders.
5. Improves the quality by increasing protein content.
Deficiency symptoms of N in plants: Plants having less than 1 % nitrogen are
usually regarded as deficient in N.
1. Due to high mobility of N in plants, its deficiency symptoms first appear on the older
leaves in the form of light green to pale yellow coloration due to proteolysis.
2. Stunted growth is the manifestation.
3. In grasses, the lower leaves usually fire or turn brown beginning at the leaf tip, and
progressing along the midrib in the form of inverted ‘V’ shape.
4. Reduction in flowering and crop yields and lower protein content are associated with N
deficiency.
Corrective measures: Nitrogen in the form of NO - is more prone for leaching
3
especially on light textured soils with more permeability. So, split application of nitrogen is
recommended. Foliar application in the form of urea @ 2 percent concentration is advocated in
dry land areas.
N Source % N
Ammonium sulfate 21.0
Ammonium chloride 25 – 26.0
Ammonium nitrate sulfate 30
Diammonium phosphate (DAP) 18
Urea 46
Toxicity symptoms of N plants: Toxicity of nitrogen leads to
Excess vegetative growth
Succulence of the plant increases;
Taller plants and heavier heads cause lodging.
Delayed maturity.
A nitrogen rich, luxuriant crop is more susceptible to insect pest and disease attacks.
Functions of phosphorus in plants: Phosphorus is the second most abundant
mineral in human body making up for more than 20 % of body minerals. It is largely absorbed
by the plant roots as dihydrogen orthophosphate ion (H PO -).
2 4
The following are the functions of phosphorus in plant system
1. Constituent of nucleoproteins, phytins and phospholipids.
2. Essential constituent of number of enzymes -important in energy transfer.
3. Essential for cell division and development.
4. Stimulates root development and growth.
5. Responsible for early establishment of seedlings.
6. Strengthens the straw and decreases lodging.
7. Brings about early maturity.
8. Counteracts the effect of excessive nitrogen.
9. Increases grain to straw ratio.
10. Improves the quality of food grain.
11. Increases rhizobial activity, increases the formation of root nodules thus helping in
more N - fixation.
Deficiency symptoms of phosphorus in plants: Because of its faster mobility in
plants, P gets translocated from older tissues to the meristematic tissue. Therefore, deficiency
symptoms of P first appear on the older leaves.
P deficiency results in
1. The production of dark green color leaves.
2. Severe restriction of root growth.
3. Thin, erect and spindly plants with sparse and restricted foliage.
4. Suppressed lateral bud production.
5. Bluish green foliage, and under continued deficiency the older leaves become bronzed or
develop reddish purple tip or leaf margins.
Toxicity symptoms of phosphorus in plants
 Excess of P causes trace element deficiency particularly Fe and Zn.
Correction of deficiency: Generally, P is applied as a basal application by band
placement. The following are the phosphatic fertilizers.
1. Single Super Phosphate (SSP) contains 16 to 22% P2O5
2. Rock phosphate contains 30-38 % P2O5
3. Triple Super Phosphate contains 46 % P2O5
4. Diammonium phosphate contains 46 % P2O5
5. Monoammonium phosphate contains 52 % P2O5
6. Basic slag contains 10-20 % P2O5
Functions of K in plants: K is absorbed by the plant as K+. Potassium is a unique
element that plants can accumulate it in abundant amounts without exhibiting any toxicity
symptoms. This behavior is referred to as luxury consumption. Potassium plays a regulatory
role in plant metabolism. Potassium is not a component of any organic compound in plants.
1. It regulates the opening and closing of stomata.
2. Plays a major role in transport of water and nutrients throughout the plant in xylem.
3. It improves drought tolerance.
4. Enhances crop quality, shelf life of fruits and vegetables.
5. Reduces lodging of crops, enhances winter hardiness.
6. Imparts disease resistance.
7. Neutralizes organic anions and other compounds and maintains the pH of cytoplasm in
the range of 7-8.
8. Activates > 60 enzymes, including starch synthetase, K is responsible for the activation
of nitrate reductase enzyme.
Deficiency symptoms of K in plants
Potassium deficiency does not manifest immediately in the form of visible symptoms.
First growth rate decreases and later deficiency symptoms appear. Deficiency symptoms first
develop on the older leaves.
1. Chlorosis along the margins followed by scorching and browning of tips of older leaves
which gradually progresses inwards giving burning appearance. Slow and stunted
growth of the plant and crop lodging.
2. Shrivelled fruits and seeds.
3. Reduced crop yields without the appearance of definite symptoms; the phenomenon is
called hidden hunger.
4. Decrease in resistance to certain plant diseases
5. Decrease in the quality of fruits and vegetables.
6. Potassium deficiency disturbs the overall physiological activity within the plant system
by altering the activities of enzymes like invertase, catalase in crops like sugarcane.
Correction measures
 Potassium chloride or muriate of potash constitutes 99% of usage of K fertilizer and
potassium sulphate accounts for 1%. Muriate of potash contains 60% K O or 50% K
2
and sulphate of potash contains 50 % K O or 41.5% K.
2
 Some crops are sensitive to high amounts of potassium chloride. These include tobacco,
grapes, cotton, fruit trees, sugarcane, potatoes, tomatoes, straw berries, onion and
cucumber. Oil palm and coconut on the contrary appear to be chloride loving crops.
 Generally, potassic fertilizers are applied as basal dose, but for light textured soils, split
application is advocated. In Andhra Pradesh split application of N and K are
recommended for light soils.
SECONDARY NUTRIENTS
Functions of Ca in plants
Calcium is absorbed by the plant as calcium ions (Ca2+).
1. Essential for the formation of cell wall and calcium pectate in the middle lamella of the
cell wall which regulates the entry of only those nutrients which are not toxic to plants.
In seeds, calcium is present as calcium phytate.
2. In root tip, calcium is very essential for the meristematic activity.
3. Provides a base for neutralisation of organic acids and other toxins (like Al) produced in
plants.
4. It plays a role in mitosis (cell division) and helps to maintain the chromosome structure.
5. Essential co-factor or an activator of a number of enzymes like hydrolases. It activates
phospholipase, argnine kinase, amylase and Adenosine tri phosphatase (ATPase)
enzymes.
6. Favours the assimilation of nitrogen into organic constituents especially proteins.
Deficiency symptoms of Ca in plants
Though calcium is highly mobile in soil, in the plant system it is the immobile nutrient and
hence the deficiency symptoms manifest at the growing tips of shoots and youngest
leaves.
Deficiency of calcium is characterized by a reduction in meristematic tissue.
2. Failure or desiccation of terminal bud development.
3. Chlorosis of young leaves followed by distortion of the growing points of the stem.
4. Blossom end rot in tomato is due to Ca deficiency
5. In fruit trees, the death of growing points followed by dies back.
6. In apple, the discoloration of the fruit meat, the condition referred as “bitter pit”.
7. In guava, the old leaves are chlorotic with red brown spots.
8. In Brassica, severe loss of color in young leaves, terminal bud leaves are hooked, leaves
become cup shaped. Old leaves collapse due to terminal bud disintegration.
9. No unfolding of new leaves in corn, whose tips are colorless and are covered with sticky
gelatinous material which makes them adhere to one another.
Correction measures
 The application of carbonate or sulphate salts of calcium @ 2 – 4 q ha-1 in furrows
could increase the yield by 48 %.
Functions of Mg in plants
The usual concentration of Mg+2 in crops varies between 0.1 and 0.4 per cent. A large
part of Mg is associated with organic anions like malate.
1. Mg is the only mineral constituent of chlorophyll located at its centre.
2. Chlorophyll formation usually accounts for about 15 to 20 % of total Mg content of
plants as Mg - porphyrin.
3. It promotes uptake and translocation of phosphorus and movement of sugars within the
plants.
4. Serves as a structural component of ribosomes. Mg activates the formation of
polypeptide chains to form amino acids. About 70 % of Mg is associated with anions
such as malate and citrate.
5. Seeds contain Mg as salt of phytic acids. Mg is required for phosphate transfer from
ATP (Phosphorylation) in carbohydrate metabolism.
6. Several enzymes (eg : Ribulose carboxylose) require Mg+2 as Cofactor.
Deficiency symptoms of Mg in plants: Mg+2 is a mobile element and is readily
translocated from older to younger plant parts in the event of deficiency and hence deficiency
symptoms are manifested in the older leaves. The magnesium deficient plants usually have less
than 0.1% Mg. Magnesium deficiency is common in the plants grown on coarse textured acidic
soils.
1. As a consequence of Mg+2 deficiency, the proportion of protein nitrogen decreases and
that of non protein nitrogen increases in plants.
2. Shortage of Mg+2 results in an interveinal chlorosis of the leaf in which only the veins
remain green and the interveinal areas turn yellow with streaky or patchy appearance.
In more advanced stages the leaf tissue becomes uniformly pale yellow, then brown
and necrotic.
3. Affected leaves turn small in final stage and curve upwards at the margins.
4. In some vegetables, interveinal chlorosis with tints of red, orange and purple colors is
observed.
5. Grass tetany: Cattle consuming forages with low Mg may suffer from
“Hypomagnesemia” (low level of blood Mg) commonly known as Grass tetany. This
happens due to high levels of NH4+ -N and K application.
Correction measures:
 Use of dolomitic lime stone Ca Mg (CO )
3 2
 Magnesia - Mgo -55 % (Mg)
 Basic slag 3-4 % Mg
At a dose of 30 - 50 kg ha-1
Functions of sulphur in plants:
1. It is required for the synthesis of the S containing amino acids cystein, cystine and
methionine and for protein synthesis.
2. It increases oil content of crops like flax, soybean, groundnut etc.
3. It is required for N fixation in legumes and is a part of nitrogenase enzyme system.
4. It is a constituent of certain vitamins viz., Thiamine and biotin, coenzymes and
glutathione, Acetyl coenz A (precursor for fatty acid synthesis), ferredoxin.
5. It is present in the crops like onion, mustard, cabbage and cauliflower as polysulfides.
6. It activates certain proteolytic enzymes such as papainase and synthesis of papain.
7. Disulfide linkages have been associated with the structure of proteins.
8. Sulfhydryl (-SH) groups in plants are related to increased cold resistance.
Deficiency symptoms of sulphur in plants:
Sulphur content in plants ranges between 0.1 to 0.4 %. In view of the large field scale
occurrences of sulphur deficiencies in India, it has been described as the fourth major nutrient
after N, P and K. Plants suffering sulphur deficiency accumulate non protein nitrogen in the
form of nitrate and amide. N:S ratio of plants is between 9 to 12 : 1. As sulphur is immobile in
the plant, its deficiency is manifested on young leaves.
1. The fading of normal green colour of the young meristem followed by chlorosis.
2. Shoot growth is restricted.
3. Reduced synthesis of proteins and oil.
4. In Brassica, the lamina is restricted and the leaves show cupping owing to the curling of
leaves.
5. The older leaves become puckered inwardly with raised areas between veins.
6. The older leaves may develop orange or reddish tints and may be shed prematurely.
7. The stem and leaf petiole may become brittle and may collapse.
Management of sulphur or correction measures for S deficiency:
 Application of elemental sulphur or gypsum particularly on alkaline soils.
 Application of sulphur containing fertilizers like single super phosphate (12-14% S),
Magnesium sulphate (30 % S), Ammonium sulphate (24.2% S).
 For correcting deficiencies of sulphur on the standing crop, foliar application of
sulphate containing salts like Ferrous sulphate (32.8% S) and ferrous ammonium
sulphate (16% S) etc.
Lecture. 27 Functions, Deficiency Symptoms and
Corrective Measures of Micronutrients
Functions of Zinc
1. Zinc influences the formation of some growth hormones in the plant.
2. It is associated with water uptake and water relations in the plants.
3. It governs the utilization of nitrogen phosphorous and other elements.
4. It is involved in auxin metabolism like, tryptophan synthetase, tryptamine
metabolism. Zinc also influences the activity of dehydrogenase enzymes e.g.
pyridine nucleotide, glucose- 6 phosphate and triose phosphate etc.
5. The other roles attributed to zinc includes phosphodiesterase, carbonic anhydrase ,
synthesis of cytochrome C etc.
6. Zinc also stabilizes ribosomal fractions.
Zinc Deficiency symptoms:
Zn deficiency symptoms show wide variation in different plant species. The common
symptoms are chlorosis between the veins, reduction in the size of the young leaves, which are
often clustered, bronzing, purple, violet, reddish brown or brown coloration of the foliage.
1) Khaira disease of rice: The first symptom of zinc deficiency appear in 3 – 4 week
old seedlings when the young leaves develop reddish brown pigmentation. The
pigmentation appears first in the middle of the leaves, then intensifies and spreads over the
entire lamina. The affected tissue becomes papery and necrotic and under conditions of
severe deficiency, the entire mass of leaves collapses and further growth of the plant is
arrested.
2) White bud of maize : Soon after the emergence of seedlings, areas between the veins
of old leaves become light yellow and develop white necrotic spots, which later develop
dark brown necrotic areas that enlarge and coalesce, resulting in the necrosis (death of the
entire leaf). Leaves that emerge and unroll subsequently appear yellow and white.
3) Mottle leaf or Frenching of citrus
4) Reduced leaf size and shortening of internodes in brinjal and mango called as
little leaf.
Correction measures:
1. Soil application of zinc sulphate (21% Zn) @ 50 kg ha-1 once for three crops or
years is effective and economic to overcome its deficiency. Zinc sulphate need to
be applied on the surface and mixed in the soil through light harrowing.
2. In case of rice, zinc sulphate can be broadcast after final puddling before
transplanting.
3.When deficiency appears on standing crop, spraying of 0.2 % ZnSO4 twice or
thrice at weekly intervals or at 0.5 per cent concentration with lime.
4. Zinc is also available as zinc chelate (mostly Zn - EDTA form). In case of highly
alkaline soils (pH>8.0) zinc chelate is better source than zinc
sulphate.
5. In calcareous soils, Zn- HEDTA (Hydroxy Ethylene Diamine Tetra Acetic acid)
form is efficient for soil application.
Functions of Iron
1. Iron helps in the formation of chlorophyll.
2. Iron is a constituent of enzyme systems and so it helps for carrying out different
enzymatic reactions in plants like, cytochrome oxidase, catalase, peroxidase ,
acotinase, nitrogenase etc.
3. Iron is a structural component of porphyrin molecules like cytochromes, hemes,
hematin, ferrichrome and leghemoglobin. These substances are involved in
oxidation reduction in respiration and photosynthesis.
4. Iron helps in absorption of other nutrient elements.
Iron Deficiency symptoms:
1. The critical limit of iron in plant is 30 ppm, the sufficiency range being 50 and
250 ppm.
2. It has been established that Fe2+ content of the plant rather than total Fe content
resolves Fe deficiency.
3. Deficiency of Fe results in interveinal chlorosis appearing first on the younger
leaves with leaf margins and veins remaining green. Plants having less than 50
ppm of Fe are usually classified as iron deficient.
4. In later stage burning of the chlorotic leaves start from the tips and margin, spread
inwards.
5. The chlorotic leaves may become white and the leaf tissues devoid of chlorophyll
die.
6. Leaves with large necrotic areas fall off and twigs defoliate.
7. In mild cases, mottled pattern may be seen with primary and secondary veins
retaining their green color.
8. In graminaceous crops, chlorosis consists of alternate strips with green veins and
yellow interveinal tissues.
9. In case of barley, maize and jowar, leaves show reddish brown spots on leaves
away from the base on margin.
10. Under conditions of severe deficiency, growth cessation occurs with the whole
plant turning necrotic.
Correction measures: In general soil application of iron salts such as ferrous sulfate is
not practiced because of their rapid oxidation to much less soluble ferric iron.
Correction of Fe deficiency is generally done by foliar sprays.
Fe deficiency is generally seen in paddy nursery, sugarcane, fruit trees in dry weather
conditions.
Sources
1. FeSO .7 H O : 19 % Fe
4 2
2. Iron chelates NaFe EDTA : 5-14 % Fe
3. Fe – EDDHA (Ethylene Diamine Dihydroxy acetic acid salt of Fe) for calcareous soils
4. Fe DTPA (Diethylene Triamine Penta Acetate salt of Fe) for alkaline soils
5. Fe HEDTA (Hydroxy Ethylene Diamine Tetra Acetate salt of Fe) for alkalisoils
6. Fe EDTA (Ethylene Diamine Tetra Acetate salt of Fe) for acid soils
Functions of Copper
1. Copper has an unique involvement in enzyme systems of plants like, oxidase
enzymes, terminal oxidation by cytochrome oxidase, photosynthetic electron
transport mediated by plastocyanin etc.
2. Copper forms various compounds with amino acids and proteins in the plant.
3. Copper helps in the utilization of iron during chlorophyll synthesis. Lack of
copper causes iron to accumulate in the nodes of plants.
4. Copper has some indirect effects on nodule formation.
5. It also acts as “electron carrier” in enzymes which bring about oxidation-
reduction reactions in plants.
Copper Deficiency symptoms
1. Plants having a copper content of less than 5 ppm are regarded as Cudeficient.
2. Male flowers’ sterility, delayed flowering and senescence are the most
important effects of Cu deficiency.
3. Chlorosis of the younger shoot tissue, white tips, reclamation disease, necrosis,
leaf distortion and die back are characteristics of Cu deficiency. Necrosis of
apical meristem results in elongation of shoot in cereals and auxiliary shoots in
dicots.
4. The shoot apex may cease to grow, resulting in the development of several
auxiliary bunds.
5. In cereals symptoms appear as bleaching and withering of young leaves.
6. Exanthema and dieback in citrus which manifests as dark brown spots on the
leaves, terminal twigs and fruits.
6. Yellowish brown blotches on the leaf particularly in legumes.
7. Tip drying and bluish green leaf tips are the symptoms in rice.
8. Empty glumes in wheat
9. Total amino nitrogen accumulates in plants
Correction measures:
 Soil and foliar application are both effective. Soil application @ 1.0 – 5 kg /ha
of CuSO4. 5 H2O (24 % Cu).
 Foliar application of CuSO4 @ 0.2 % concentration.
 Cu-EDTA contains 9-13 % Cu.
Functions of Manganese
1. The role of manganese is regarded as being closely associated with that of iron.
2. Manganese helps in Ascarbic acid formation.
3. Manganese also takes part in oxidation- reduction processes and decarboxylation
and hydrolysis reactions.
4. Manganese is needed for maximal activity of many enzyme reactions in the citric
acid cycle.
5. Manganese influences auxin levels in plants and high concentrations of Mn favor
the breakdown of Indole Acetic Acid (IAA).
6. It takes part in electron transport in photosystem II.
7. It also takes part in enzyme systems like, chromatin-bound RNA polymerase,
synthesis of tRNA.
Manganese Deficiency symptoms : Mn deficient plants contain less than 25 ppm
Mn. Deficiency symptoms of Mn are more severe on middle leaves than on the younger ones
because Mn is preferentially translocated to the younger tissues. Interveinal chlorosis in
dicotyledons is characterized by the appearance of chlorotic and necrotic spots in the
interveinal areas. In monocotyledonous plants like cereals, Mn deficiency symptoms appear as
greenish grey spots, fleeks and stripes more on the basal leaves (Grey speck). Chlorotic leaf
areas soon become necrotic and turn red, reddish brown or brown. Symptoms of Mn deficiency
are popularly known as Grey speck of Oats
 Speckled yellow of sugar beet
 Marsh spot of peas
 Pahala blight of sugar cane
 Frenching of tung grass
Correction Measures:
Application of 20-40 kg Manganese Sulphate to soil , Foliar application of
Manganese Sulphate @ 2 percent concentration is recommended.
Functions of Boron
1. The primary role of boron is associated with the calcium metabolism.
2. Boron increases the solubility of calcium as well as mobility of calcium in the
plant.
3. It acts as a regulator of K/Ca ratio in the plant.
4. It helps in the absorption of nitrogen.
5. It is necessary for the translocation of sugars, starches, phosphorus etc.
6. Boron is required for the development of new cells in meristematic tissue.
7. Boron is necessary for proper pollination and fruit or seed setting.
8. It helps for the formation of nodules in leguminous plants.
9. Boron regulates carbohydrate metabolism.
Boron Deficiency symptoms
Plants having B concentration in the order of 5 to 30 ppm are suspected to be boron deficient.
Critical deficiency range of B varies from 5 to 10 ppm in graminae plants and 20 to 70 ppm in
dicotyledons.
1. Boron deficiency symptoms are conspicuous on the terminal buds or the youngest
leaves; which become discolored and may die under acute deficiency.
2. Internodes become shorter and give appearance of a bush or rosette.
3. Increased diameter of stem and petiole gives rise to the typical cracked stem of
celery.
4.Specific names given to B deficiency in different crops are
Heart rot of sugar beet.
Browning or hollow stem of cauliflower.
Top sickness of tobacco
Internal cork of apple.
Boron fertilizers : Generally crops like alfalfa and other legumes, cruciferous plants such
as cabbage, cauliflower and turnip and fruit trees such as apple, need boron fertilization.
i) Foliar aplication of Borax (Na2B4 O7 10 H2O which contains 10.6 % B) at 0.1
% concentration.
ii) Calmonite Ca2B4O7 5 H2O is suitable for sandy soils due to slow solubility.
iii) Boric acid H3BO3 contains 17 % B
iv) Solubor : Na B 07. 5 H O + Na B1006 10 H O contains 20-21 %
2 4 2 2 2
Functions of Molybdenum
1. Molybdenum is an essential component of the major enzyme nitrate reductase
in plants.
2. The molybdenum requirement of plants is influenced by the form of inorganic
nitrogen supplied to plants, with either nitrate (NO3-) OR ammonium (NH4+)
effectively lowering its need.
3. Molybdenum is also a structural component of nitrogenase, the enzyme actively
involved in nitrogen fixation by root-nodule bacteria of leguminous crops, by
some algae and actinomycetes, and by free-living-nitrogen fixing organisms
such as Azotobacter.
4. Molybdenum is also reported to have an essential role in iron absorption and
translocation in plants.
Molybdenum Deficiency Symptoms:
1. In most plants with reticulate venation, the first effect of Mo deficiency appears
as chlorotic mottling between the veins.
2. Brassica crops are very susceptible to Mo deficiency, the symptoms developing
in 3-4 week old plants.
3.Tomato, lettuce, spinach, beet root and Brassica speces especially cauliflower,
broccoli and rape seed are very sensitive to restricted Mo supply.
4. Legumes develop symptoms which resemble N deficiency.
5. Grasses seem to have low Mo requirement.
6. Citrus plants develop ‘yellow spot’.
7. Cauliflower exhibits whiptail (leaves get twisted elongated)
8. Cabbage shows cupping, veins become purple, leaves become necrotic
and malformed along the margins.
9. Tomato – chlorotic mottling – old leaves roll inwards along leafmargin.
10.In rice, slight chlorosis between the vein in the middle of the upper and middle
leaves and extending across the width.
Correction measures
1. Application of 400 -500 gm of sodium molybdate (Na2MoO4) along with super
phosphate to the soil.
2. Mo deficiency can be corrected by spraying 0.1 % sodium molybdate.
3. Liming of acid soils helps in correcting Mo deficiency.
4.Seed treatment with Mo as sodium molybdate is very effective method of
correcting the deficiency.
Functions of Chlorine
1. Chlorine has been shown to be involved in the oxygen evolution in photosynthetic
reactions.
2. Claimed to be involved in photophosphorylation.
3. In microorganisms, chlorine containing metabolically active compounds like
chlorometabolites were found.
4. In higher plants, chlorides largely accumulate in free ionic form in cell vacuoles.
Chlorine Deficiency symptoms:
1. Common symptoms are wilted appearance of the foliage and stuffy roots with
laterals showing branching.
2. Tomato leaves show chlorotic mottling, bronzing and tissue necrosis.
Chloride is beneficial for some salt loving plants like beetroot, spinach,
cabbage etc. There is a negative interaction between chloride and nitrate (NO -
3
) ions in plants
Lecture.28. Soil fertility - reasons for soil fertility
reduction- Management practices to improve
soil fertility
SOIL FERTILITY
Literally the word fertile means ‘bearing abundantly’ and a fertile soil is considered to be one
that produces abundant crops under suitable environmental conditions.
Soil fertility is concerned with the inherent capacity of soil to provide nutrients in adequate
amounts and in proper balance for the growth of specified plants when other factors such as
light, moisture, temperature and the physical condition of the soil are favourable.
Reasons for soil fertility Reduction
The fertility of soil is declining due to various reasons like
1. Crop removal
Different crops remove nutrients in different proportions, for example rice crop removes 85-
15-90 kg nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium to produce 3 tonnes of yield while maize
requires 175-35-175 kg nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium to give 5 tonnes of yield.
2. Removal by weeds
Weeds remove more quantities of nutrients than crop plants
3. Soil erosion
Due to wind, water and air erosion, the upper fertile surface soil will eroded leading to decline
in soil fertility.
4. Leaching
Soluble nutrients like nitrogen on conversion in to nitrate form are lost due to leaching into
lower subsurface layers.
5. Volatilization
On application of nitrogenous fertilizers, they are partly lost as NH (gaseous form) due to
3
volatilization.
6. Improper method of application of fertilizers
Loss of nutrients can be reduced by adopting appropriate methods of fertilizer application like
band placement or pocketing at the base of the plants.
7. Use of Complex fertilizers
Indiscriminate use of complex fertilizers (Ex: 28-28-0, 17-17-17 etc.,) leads to micro and
secondary nutrient deficiencies.
8. Non-application of micronutrients
Farmers are excessively applying N, P and K 5 fertilizers, ignoring the requirement of micro
and secondary nutrients.
9. Crop rotation
Monocropping of same crop without adopting crop rotation mines the nutrients from the same
depth in the soil leading to nutrient depletion. Deep rooted crops like redgram, cotton,
sunflower etc., should rotated with crops like rice, maize and jowar whose root system will be
in the surface layers.
Management practices to improve soil fertility
Efficient nutrient management is the prime concern in the management of optimum soil
fertility. It has received maximum attention during the past four decades, as is evidence from
the fertilizer consumption pattern and its contribution to increasing crop production. In a
successful management of soil fertility, following aspects need consideration.
 Optimum fertilizer rates
 Balanced use of fertilizer nutrients
 Efficient use of fertilizers
 Nutrient needs of cropping system, and
a. Optimum fertilizer rates:
The amount fertilizer needed by a soil depends upon its nutrient supplying capacity to crop and
the requirement of crop per se. It is also influenced by soil and climatic conditions and
management practices.
b. Balanced use of fertilizer nutrients
Crops remove nutrients continuously from the soils and therefore, their replenishment through
fertilizers and manures is essential. The ideal ratio of nutrients for optimal growth varies with
soil type, available nutrient status, crops and cropping systems, weather, amounts and kinds of
fertilizers applied and their time of application, and use of soil amendments.
c. Efficient use of fertilizer
Increasing nutrient efficiency is the key to the management of soil fertility. The proportion of
the added fertilizer actually used by plants is a measure of the fertilizer efficiency. Soil
characteristics, crop characteristics and fertilizer management characteristics are the major
factors that determine fertilizer efficiency.
i. Soil characteristics: Soil characteristics like nutrient status of soil, forms of
nutrients, nutrient losses and transformations, soil organic matter, soil moisture and
physical condition of soil affect the efficiency of fertilizer
ii. Crop characteristics: Nutrient uptake, root characteristics, crop rotation affects
fertilizer use efficiency
iii. Fertilizer characteristics and management techniques: The efficiency of a fertilizer
varies to a large extent on the type of fertilizer, time of application and method of
application.
d. Nutrient needs of cropping system:
The needs of a cropping system should be taken into account in view of the long-term
implications of nutrient management where direct, residual, and cumulative effects of applied
fertilizers are taken into consideration.
e. Integrated Nutrient Management:
Integrated nutrient management (INM) envisages the use of chemical fertilizers in conjuction
with organic manures, legumes in cropping systems, biofertilizers, crop residues and other
locally available nutrient sources for sustaining soil health and productivity.
Lecture 29. Soil testing objectives- Importance
SOIL TESTING
Soil testing is useful tool for making recommendations for the application of fertilizers to
crops. It gives a measure of the availability of nutrients to crops.
Soil testing Objectives
1. Grouping soils into classes relative to the levels of nutrients for suggesting fertilizer
practices.
2. Predicting the probability of getting profitable responses.
3. Helping to evaluate soil productivity.
4. Determining specific soil conditions like alkali, salinity and acidity which limits crop yields.
Definition
A rapid chemical analysis to assess the available nutrient status and reaction of a soil.
(or)
Inclusions of interpretations and evaluations of the soil test values and fertilizer
recommendations based on the results of the chemical analysis and on other considerations.
There are 20 elements known to be essential for crop growth. Three of these elements N,P and
K are widely deficient in the soil. Soil pH also is a common limitations to plant growth. Soil
testing, therefore, chiefly involves N,P,K and pH. Secondary and micro-nutrient analysis may
be done on a regional basis.
Soil testing is a programme that may be divided into four phases:
(i) Collecting the soil samples,
(ii) Extraction and determining the available nutrients,
(iii) Calibrating and interpreting the analytical results, and
(iv) Making the fertilizer recommendations.
Lecture No. 30 Site Specific Nutrient Management
Fertilizer application recommendations are often based on crop response data averaged over
large areas, though farmers’ fields show large variability in terms of nutrient-supplying
capacity and crop response to nutrients. Thus, blanket fertilizer application recommendations
may lead farmers to over-fertilize in some areas and under-fertilize in others, or apply an
improper balance of nutrients for their soil or crop. An alternative to blanket guidance,
SiteSpecific Nutrient Management (SSNM) aims to optimize the supply of soil nutrients over
time and space to match the requirements of crops through four key principles. The principles,
called as the “4 Rs”. They are:
Right product: Match the fertilizer product or nutrient source to crop needs and soil type
to ensure balanced supply of nutrients.
Right rate: Match the quantity of fertilizer applied to crop needs, taking into account the
current supply of nutrients in the soil. Too much fertilizer leads to environmental losses,
including runoff, leaching and gaseous emissions, as well as wasting money. Too little
fertilizer exhausts soils, leading to soil degradation.
Right time: Ensure nutrients are available when crops need them by assessing crop nutrient
dynamics. This may mean using split applications of mineral fertilizers or combining organic
and mineral nutrient sources to provide slow-releasing sources of nutrients.
Right place: Placing and keeping nutrients at the optimal distance from the crop and soil
depth so that crops can use them is key to minimizing nutrient losses. Generally, incorporating
nutrients into the soil is recommended over applying them to the surface. The ideal method
depends on characteristics of the soil, crop, tillage regime and type of fertilizer.
Advantages of SSNM:
Higher profits: SSNM can increase and maintain yields by optimizing the balance
between supply and demand of nutrients and providing more balanced plant nutrition. In
general, it improves nutrient use efficiency and provides greater returns on investments in
fertilizer.
Reduced nitrous oxide emissions: Agriculture contributes 70-90% of nitrous oxide
(N O) emissions, mostly from N fertilizer. SSNM reduces N O emissions by reducing total N
2 2
application and/or timing applications to crop needs, thus avoiding N losses to volatilization,
leaching and runoff.
Improved disease resistance: The more balanced NPK nutrition that comes with
SSNM may lead to improved resistance to plant diseases.
Challenges to adoption of SSNM:
Technology and knowledge requirements: SSNM requires knowledge of underlying soil
properties and the ability to monitor crops’ nutrient status and adjust fertilizer inputs
accordingly. While the need to conduct on-farm nutrient trials and soil tests has historically
been a barrier to implementation of SSNM, the development of decision support systems and
farmer-friendly tools and techniques that use proxy information to calculate nutrient
requirements make SSNM more accessible to farmers and farm advisors (see “Tools for
implementing SSNM”, below). Availability of fertilizers. Cost and access to fertilizers—
whether synthetic or organic—is not universal. Development of input markets or identification
of on-farm nutrient sources may be a necessary precursor to adoption of SSNM, though SSNM
can help farmers make best use of limited nutrient resources.
Variable economic benefit: For SSNM to increase farmers’ profits, SSNM must
deliver either a) savings from reduced fertilizer use without a reduction in yields, or b) yield
increases that are valued higher than the costs of acquiring and using SSNM technology.
Farmers are more likely to see positive net returns with high-value crops, where yield increases
can substantially increase profits, or when fertilizer prices are high.
Lecture.31 Environmental Pollution
Environmental pollution is defined as “the contamination of the physical and biological
components of the earth/atmosphere system to such an extent that normal environmental
processes are adversely affected.
 Sewage and industrial effluents which pollute the soil ultimately affect human health.
 Various types of chemicals like acids, alkalis, pesticides, insecticides, weedicides,
fungicides, heavy metals etc. in the industrial discharges affect soil fcertility by causing
changes in physical, chemical and biological properties.
 Some of the persistent toxic chemicals inhibit the non-target organisms, soil flora and
fauna and reduce soil productivity
 These chemicals accumulate in food chain and ultimately affect human health
 Indiscriminate use of pesticides causes pollution
 Sewage sludge has many types of pathogenic bacteria , viruses and intenstinal worms
which may cause various types of diseases
 Decomposing organic matter in soil also produces toxic vapours
 Radioactive fallout on vegetation is the source of radio- isotopes which enter the food
chain in the grazing animals
 Man made sources include thermal power plants, industrial units, plastics, vehicular
emissions, fossil fuel burning, agricultural activities etc. causes environmental
pollution
 Causes depletion of ozone layer. The ozone layer absorbs infrared radiation emitted by
the Earth’s surface, effectively trapping heat in the atmosphere.
Soil Pollution
There are generally six different kinds of pollution
1. Pesticides Pesticides include insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, rodenticides and
nematicides and many other chemicals like disinfectants, antibiotics, defoliants,
chemosterilants and juvenile harmones.
Ex: DDT, BHC, 2,4,5,-T, Chemical granules - Thimet, Carbofuran, mercury related fungicides
bio degradation is most important by which removed from soils.
2. Heavy metal Pollution: The application of potentially toxic elements (Cadmium,
Arsenic, Chromium, Mercury, Lead, Nickel, Molybdenum, Florine, Boran, Copper,
Manganese, Zinc) to the soil through compost, sewage – sludge and other waste materials may
increase heavy metal concentration in crops. By consumption of these heavy metal containing
food causes health disorders to human.
3. Organic Wastes: Different organic waste materials are rich source for building up soil
fertility but these soils are contaminated with plastic wastages. Organic wastes contain
detergents, water softners, borates, phosphates cause a serious soil pollution. Soil erosion is
also a major problem.
4. Effect of Salts: Salts accumulated in coastal regions causes effect on crop growth.
Accumulation of salts in the plant root zone may be a serious problem due to application of
salt-laden irrigation water in soil. High concentration salts are unwanted because they reduce
or inhibit plant growth.
5. Acid Rains: Acid rain, also called acid precipitation or acid deposition, primarily
produced from the emission of sulfur dioxide (SO ) and nitrogen oxides ( the combination of
2
NO and NO ) from human activities, Industries, mostly the combustion of fossil fuels.
2
6. Radio Nuclides: The main concern with the radio activity is the fall out of radioactive
materials produced from explosions and hazards associated with it the other source of pollution
is through the dumping of the waste materials from the nuclear power plants, nuclear reactors,
and wastes from the medical and other research laboratories. The radioactive materials are
Strontium – 90, Secium-137 causes pollution.
The Natural radioactive materials are Potassium-40, Rubidium-87, Carbon-14 causes
pollution.
Effect of Fertilizers
Nitrate pollution of ground water
High soil nitrate level and sufficient downward movement of water to move nitrate below the
rooting depth are often encountered. The consumption of water containing high levels of
nitrate -N leads to ‘methaemoglobinemia’ called as ‘blue baby syndrome’ in infants in the age
of < 6 months.
The World Health Organisation standard for drinking water is 10 mg NO3 --N/L. An excessive
ingestion of nitrates may also increase the risk of cancer in humans due to the formation of
nitrosamines.
Eutrophication
It refers to the process of enrichment of surface water bodies with nutrients. The nutrient
enrichment of water bodies results in intense proliferation and accumulation of algae and
higher aquatic plants in excessive quantities that can result in detrimental changes in the water
quality. Estimates indicated that more than 80% of N entering the surface waters originates
from agricultural activities. Both N and P are important in stimulating eutrophication.
Pollution controlling Measures
 Effluents should be properly treated before discharging them on the soil
 Adopting IPM and INM practices to reduce reliance on pesticides
 Siting of industries after proper environmental impact assessment studies
 Solid Wastes should be properly collected and disposed off by appropriate method
 Biodegradable organic waste should be used for generation of biogas
 Using low sulphur coal in industries
 Use of nitrogen fixing plants to supplement the use of fertilizers
 Planting trees would reduce pollution by sediments and also prevent soil erosion.
 Separate drainage of sewage and rain water should be provided to prevent over flow of
sewage with rain water
 Precautions should be followed to prevent radioactive contamination
Lecture. 32 Green House Effect
The greenhouse effect is the process by which radiation from a planet's atmosphere warms the
planet's surface to a temperature above what it would be without this atmosphere.
Green House Effect
When sunlight reaches Earth's surface some is absorbed and warms the earth and most
of the rest is radiated back to the atmosphere at a longer wavelength than the sun light. Some of
these longer wavelengths are absorbed by greenhouse gases in the atmosphere before they are
lost to space. The absorption of this long wave radiant energy warms the atmosphere. These
greenhouse gases act like a mirror and reflect back to the Earth some of the heat energy which
would otherwise be lost to space. The reflecting back of heat energy by the atmosphere is
called the "greenhouse effect".
Greenhouse gases are those gases that contribute to the greenhouse effect. The major
natural greenhouse gases are water vapor, which causes about 36-70% of the greenhouse effect
on earth (not including clouds); carbon dioxide (CO ), which causes 50%; carbon monoxide
2
(CO), which causes 20%, methane, Methanol, Chloro floro Carbons and Hydro floro carbons,
which causes 12%, Nitrogen Oxides, which causes 7%, other gases, which causes 11% and
ozone, which causes 3-7%. Almost 100% of the observed temperature increase over the last 50
years has been due to the increase in the atmosphere of greenhouse gas concentrations like
water vapour, carbon dioxide (CO ), methane and ozone. The largest contributing source of
2
greenhouse gas is the burning of fossil fuels leading to the emission of carbon dioxide.
Effects of Green House effect
1. The rise in temperature empowers the greenhouse effect and the thawing of the ice mass
causing rise in sea level.
2. Flooding in coastal areas
3. Changes occur in weather conditions
4. Disruption of the water cycle
5. Effect on the ozone layer
6. Effect on the oceanic climate
Control Measures of Global Warming
1. Forest protection /Reforestation reduces greenhouse gases
2. Composting and recycling of agricultural waste materials
3. Use alternative sources of energy, instead of using coolers, fridges and air conditioners
which releases greenhouse gases like CFC, HFC
4. Recovery of Methane from garbage
5. Following of Anti-pollution measures controls global warming
