PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
FACULTY OF AGRICULTURE
DIPLOMA IN AGRICULTURE
STUDY MATERIAL
COURSE NO: DA – 131
PRINCIPLES OF ENTOMOLOGY & PRODUCTIVE ENTOMOLOGY
CREDITS: 4 (3+1)
Prepared by
Dr. ANUGU ANIL REDDY, Assistant Professor, APT, Malthummeda
Dr. B. DILEEP KUMAR, Vice Principal, APT, Jammikunta
Dr. M. ANURADHA, Principal, APT, Palem
PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
AGRICULTURAL POLYTECHNIC
Detailed Lecture Outline
DA-131 (Principles of Entomology and Productive Entomology)
Theory:
1. Introduction of Entomology
2. Characters of class Insecta – Division of class Insecta into subclasses – pterygota,
Apterygota, their characters, classifications and examples
3. Characters of Orthoptera
4. Orthoptera – Head, antenna, mouth parts, thorax, characters of wings, abdomen.
Examples of agricultural importance.
5. Characters of Thysanoptera
6. Thysanoptera – Segmented antenna, compound eyes, asymmetrical mouth parts, wing
characters, parthenogenetic type or reproduction.
7. Thysanoptera – example of agricultural importance.
8. Order Hemiptera Sub order Heteroptera characters
9. Heteroptera – 4 to 5 segmented antenna, well developed compound eyes, sucking type of
mouth parts, large pronotum, wing characters.
10. Sub Order Homoptera Characters
11. Homoptera – Head, compound eyes well developed, 3 to 10 segmented antenna. Piercing
and sucking type of mouth parts. Thoracic characters, wing characters.
12. Homoptera – insects sexual and parthenogenetic reproduction
13. Homoptera – Examples of agricultural importance.
14. Order Lepidoptera Characters
15. Lepidoptera – Mouth parts, head, compound eyes, characters of wings.
16. Lepidoptera – Differences between moths and butterflies
17. Lepidoptera – examples of agricultural importance.
18. Order Coleptera characters
19. Coleptera – antenna, bitting type of mouth parts, thoracic characters, wing characters
20. Coleptera - larval and pupa exarate
21. Coleptera - examples of agricultural importance
22. Order Hymenoptera characters
23. Hymenoptera – Head, well developed compound eyes, antenna, mouth parts, wing
characters, trochanter 1 or 2 segmented, abdominal characters
24. Hymenoptera – larval and pupal characters
25. Hymenoptera - examples of agricultural importance
26. Order Diptera characters
27. Diptera – Head, eyes, antenna, mouth parts, thoracic characters, wings, halters tarsus 5
segmented
28. Diptera – larval and pupal characters
29. Diptera - examples of agricultural importance
30. External characters of cockroach
31. Cockroach – segmentation, body regions, head, throax, abdomen, head, mouth parts
32. Cockroach- thorax – prothorax, mesothorax and metathorax,
33. Cockroach- legs and wings. Abdomen-anal ceric and styles.
34. Kinds of insects mouth parts
35. Biting and chewing type, sucking type, Rasping and sucking type
36. sponging and sucking type.
37. Different Types of injuries caused by insects
38. Different types of injuries and damage symptoms caused by insects
39. Introduction to Integrated Pest Management
40. Importance, concepts and principles of IPM
41. Bio agents – parasitoids and predators
42. Chemical control – Importance of pesticides
43. Classification of insecticides
44. Different formulations of insecticides
45. Study of important group of insecticides and their examples
46. Botanical insecticides – cyclodienes, organo phosphates, carbamates, synthetic
pyrethroids, novel insecticides nematicides, rodenticides, acaricides, antifeedants,
attractants, sex pheromones
47. & 48. Compatibility of insecticides – insecticides mixtures, phytotoxicity
Introduction of Arthropoda
Arthropoda is a largest phylum in animal kingdom. The word Arthropoda was derived
from Greek (Arthros = joint, Poda = foot/feet. In addition, the arthropods have developed a hard,
protective exoskeleton (outer shell). Chitin is the main component in arthropod exoskeletons.
Many familiar species belong to the phylum Arthropoda insects, spiders, scorpions,
centipedes, and millipedes on land; crabs, crayfish, shrimp, lobsters, and barnacles in water.
Arthropods are considered the most successful animals on Earth. The phylum includes more
species and more individuals than all other groups of animals combined. Over 85 percent of all
known animal species are arthropods. They live in the widest range of habitats and eat the
greatest varieties of food. The rigid cuticle inhibits growth, so arthropods replace it periodically
by moulting.
General Characters of Arthropoda:
• The body of arthropods is bilaterally symmetrical.
• These animals are triploblastic, and the body is segmented into head, thorax, and
abdomen.
• They have jointed appendages that help in movements.
• The body cavity is filled with white coloured blood that is known as haemocoel.
• The exoskeleton structure is hard and made of complex sugar, namely chitin.
• Arthropoda species can be both terrestrial and aquatic.
• These animals have compound eyes on their head, capable of mosaic vision.
• Their nervous system is well-developed.
• Their heads bear the brain and all the sensory organs such as antennae, hair, statocysts,
and auditory organs.
• One of the most important features of arthropods is their open circulatory system with
arteries and dorsal heart.
• In an Arthropoda diagram, the digestive tract is found with the mouth at one end and the
anus at the opposite part of the body.
• The aquatic arthropods excrete waste through coaxal glands, and the terrestrials use
malpighian tubule to excrete.
• Phylum Arthropoda shows sexual dimorphism that is either internal or external.
• These animals are unisexual.
• With the help of trachea or book lungs, the terrestrial forms perform respiration. Their
aquatic type uses gills or the body surface to respire.
• Muscles are composed of striated fibres, ciliated epithelium absent
• Development may be direct or indirect.
Clasification of Arthopoda
It is the largest phylum in the animal kingdom. Besides insects, many creatures like
crayfish, crabs, lobsters, centipedes, millipedes, spiders, mites, ticks, scorpions etccome under
this category.
Phylum arthropoda is classified into 7 classes viz
1 .Onychophora (claw bearing): Ex: peripatus
2. Crustacea (crusta-shell): Ex: prawns, crabs, wood louse
3.Arachnida (Arachine-spider): Ex: scorpion, spider, ticks, mites
4.Chilopoda (chilo-lip,poda-legs): Ex: centipedes
5.Diplopoda (diplo-two,poda-legs): Ex: millipedes
6.Trilobita (an extinct group)
7.Hexopoda (hexa-Six; poda-legs) Ex: insects
Characters of class: Insecta (in-internal; sect-cut)
Insects have segmented bodies, jointed legs, and external skeletons (exoskeletons).
Insects are distinguished from other arthropods by their body, which is divided into three major
regions:
1. The head, which bears the mouthparts, eyes, and a pair of antennae,
2. The three-segmented thorax, which usually has three pairs of legs (hence “Hexapoda”) in
adults and usually one or two pairs of wings.
3. The many-segmented abdomen, which contains the digestive, excretory, and reproductive
organs.
Body segmentation of Insect
In general, insect body is divided in to a series of segments, which in primitive
arthropods are known as “somites” or “metameres”. During the process of evolution, these
somites gets fused with each other in different ways forming the body parts of the existing
arthropods.
The type of arrangement of these body segments in embryonic stage is known as primary
segmentation while in adult insects is known as the secondary segmentation which differ from
primary in having a sclerotized membranous intersegmental region.
Insect body is divided in to three regions or tagmata namely head, thorax and abdomen.
This grouping of body segments in to regions is known as tagmosis.
Head consists of mouthparts, compound eyes, simple eyes (ocelli) and a pair of antennae.
Thorax consists of 3 segments i.e. prothorax, mesothorax and metathorax, Meso and
metathorax are together known as pterothorax. All the three thoracic segments possess a pair of
legs and meso and meta thorax possess one pair of wings.
Abdomen has 7-11 segments with genital appendages on 8th and 9th segments.
Insect Head
Insect head is a hard and highly sclerotized compact structure. It is the foremost part in
insect body consisting of 6 segments that are fused to form a head capsule. The head segments
can be divided in to two regions i.e. procephalon and gnathocephalon (mouth).
Six segments of head are represented as.
S.No Segment Appendages
1 Pre antennary segment No appendages
2 Antennary segment Antennae
3 Intercalary segment No appendages
4 Mandibular segment Mandibles
5 First maxillary segment Maxillae
6 Second maxillary/labial segment Labium
Sclerites and sutures of head
The head capsule is formed by the union of number of sclerites or cuticular plates or
areas which are joined together by means of cuticular lines or ridges known as sutures.
These sutures provide mechanical support to the cranial wall. A general insect posses the
following sclerites.
1. Labrum : It is small sclerite that forms the upper lip of the mouth cavity. It is freely
attached or suspended from the lower margin of the clypeus
2.Clypeus: It is situated above the labrum and is divided in to anterior ante-clypeus and
posterior post-clypeus.
3. Frons : It is the facial part of the insect consisting of median ocellus.
4. Vertex : It is the top portion of the head behind the frons or the area between the two
compound eyes.
5. Epicraniun : It is the upper part of the head extending from vertex to occipital suture.
6. Occiput : It is an inverted “U” shaped structure representing the area between the
epicranium and post occiput.
7. Post occiput : It is the extreme posterior part of the insect head that remains before the
neck region.
8. Gena : It is the area extending from below the compound eyes to just above the mandibles
9. Occular sclerites : These are cuticular ring like structures present around each compound
eye
10. Antennal sclerites : These form the basis for the antennae and present around the scape
which are well developed in Plecoptera (stone flies)
All the above sclerites gets attached through cuticular ridges or sutures to provide the
attachment for the muscles inside.
The common sutures present in head are
1) Clypeolabral suture : It is the suture present between clypeus and labrum. It remains in the
lower margin of the clypeus from which the labrum hangs down.
2) Clypeofrontal suture or epistomal suture: The suture present between clypeus and frons
3) Epicranial suture: It is an inverted ‘Y’ shaped suture distributed above the facial region
extending up to the epicranial part of the head. It consists of two arms called frontal suture
occupying the frons and stem called as coronal suture. This epicranial suture is also known as
line of weakness or ecdysial suture because the exuvial membrane splits along this suture
during the process of ecdysis.
4) Occipital suture: It is ‘U’ shaped or horseshoe shaped suture between epicranium and occiput.
5) Post occipital suture: It is the only real suture in insect head. Posterior end of the head is
marked by the post occipital suture to which the sclerites are attached. As this suture separates
the head from the neck, hence named as real suture.
6) Genal suture: It is the sutures present on the lateral side of the head i.e. gena.
7) Occular suture: It is circular suture present around each compound eye.
8) Antennal suture: It is a marginal depressed ring around the antennal socket.
Thorax
It is the middle part of the body consisting of three segments each possessing a pair of
legs and a pair of wings on meso and meta thoracic segment. Meso and meta thoracic segments
together known as pterothorax. Sclerite of dorsal region of thorax is tergum or notum in case of
winged insect, ventral region is called sternum and lateral region is called pleuron.
Abdomen
Abdomen forms the posterior part of the insect body . Pre genital appendages are absent
in pterygotes and present in Apterygotes. The abdomen in the embryo usually consists 12
segments, later the last segments degenerate and appear as 7- 11 segments. Last segment is
known as telson or tail as in case of Protura. Abdominal Segments from 1 to 7 are pregenital
segments, eighth and ninth are known as genital segments as they form genital appendages i.e.
ovipositor in females and aedeagus or penis in males.Tenth and eleventh segments are known as
postgenital segments. The 10th segment in general forms the supra anal plate and 11th segment
is represented by a pair of anal cerci (usually known as post- genital abdominal appendages).
Pre-genital segments are represented by collophore, furcula and tenaculum in
Collembola, styli in Thysanura and cornicles (on dorsal side of 5th and 6th abdominal segments.)
in aphids. The abdominal segments consist of tracheal gills In immature forms of trichopterans,
mayflies, mosquitoes etc. The last abdominal segments telescope in to each other to form a
pseudo ovipositor in diptera. The 1st abdominal segment get fused to metathorax forming
propodeum whereas 2nd abdominal segment forms a narrow pedicel or petiole followed by
enlarged gaster (rest of the abdominal segments) in hymenoptera.
Class Insecta
Sub class Apterygota Sub class Pterygota (Metabola)
(Ametabola) Wingless (winged insects)
(Imm’s classification)
1. Protura – Telson tails
2. Diplura – Diplurans
3. Collembola – Spring tails, snow fleas etc
4. Thysanura –Bristle tails,Silver fish etc
Division: Exopterygota (Hemi Division(cid:1)Endopterygota (Holo metabola
metabloa) ( wings develop ( wings develop internally
externally)
5. Ephemeroptera (cid:1) May flies
6. Odonata (cid:1) Dragon flies and Damsel flies 21. Neuroptera (cid:1) Ant lions and lace wings
7. Plecoptera (cid:1) Stone flies 22. Mecoptera (cid:1) Scorpion flies
8. Dictyoptera (cid:1) Cockroaches and mantids 23. Trichoptera (cid:1) Caddis flies
9.Grylloblattodea (cid:1) Grylloblattids 24. Lepidoptera (cid:1) Moths and butteflies
10.Orthoptera (cid:1) Grasshoppers, locusts, 25. Diptera (cid:1) Flies, mosquitoes
Crickets , mole crickets etc.
11.Phasmida (cid:1) Stick insects 26. Siphanoptera (cid:1) Fleas
12. Dermaptera (cid:1) Earwigs 27. Hymenoptera –Ants, bees , wasps
13. Embioptera (cid:1) Web spinners 28. Coleoptera(cid:1) Beetles, weevils
14. Isoptera (cid:1) Termites 29. Strepsiptera(cid:1)Stylopids
15. Zoraptera (cid:1) Zorapterans
16. Psocoptera (cid:1) Book lice
17. Mallophaga (cid:1) Bird lice
18. Siphunculata (Anoplura) (cid:1) Sucking lice
19. Hemiptera (cid:1) Plant bugs
20. Thysanoptera (cid:1) Thrips
The class insecta has two subclasses viz., Apterygota and Pterygota.
Apterygota( Ametabola) Pterygota(Metabola)
Small and primitive insects & Primarily Developed insects & Winged and
wingless secondarily wingless
Adults have pregenital abdominal Adults without pregenital abdominal
appendages appendages
Metamorphosis is simple or absent Metamorphosis is present and
variable
Mandibles articulate with head at Mandibles articulate with head at two
single point -Monocondyle points -Dicondyle
Exopterygota (Hemimetabola) Endopterygota (Holometabola)
Metamorphosis simple and Complete and complex
incomplete
Wings develop externally internally
Immature stages (nymphs) Immature stages (lava) differ adults
in structure and habits
resemble adults in structure and
habits
No pupal instar Pupal instar present
CHARACTERS OF IMPORTANT ORDERS
ORDER: ORTHOPTERA (Ortho: straight, Ptera: Wings, Straight winged Insects )
Head is Hypognathous or Proganthous
Large well developed compound eyes as well as three ocelli.
Filiform Antennae
Mouthparts Mandibulate (Chewing and biting type )
Large pronotum
Fore wings are long, narrow, leathery called tegmina.
Hind wings are broad, membraneous and folded fan like beneath the forewings at rest.
Hind legs have enlarged femur used for jumping -saltatorial in grasshoppers.
Fore legs modified for digging (fossorial) in mole crickets.
Tarsi 3-4 segmented
Stridulation (sound producing) is by rubbing forewings against each other (alary type) or both
hind femora over tegmina(femoro-alary type)
Tympanal organs or Auditory organs are located on either side of the first abdominal segment or
at the base of fore tibia
Male genetalia concealed by the boat shaped 9th abdominal sternum.
Females usually have well developed ovipositor
Anal cerci are short and unsegmented.
Hemimetabolous (having nymphs that look like small adults and no pupa), having three stages of
development; egg, nymph and adult.
Examples :Grasshoppers, Crickets, Locusts
Rice Grasshoppers-Oxya nitidula, Heiroglyphus banian
ORDER : THYSANOPTERA (Thysano: fringed, Ptera: Wings, Fringed-winged Insects)
Antennae 6-10 segmented
Conspicuous Compound eyes
Asymmetrical mouth parts. Right mandible is absent. Lacerating or Rasping and sucking type
Fringed wings
Tarsus is two segmented with arolium at the pretarsus.
Anal cerci are absent
Metamorphosis is Intermediate between simple and complex, in which 1st and 2nd instar larvae
are active, resembling adults (called nymphs) where as 3rd and 4th instar are inactive pre-pupal
and pupa like stages.
Parthenogenesis reproduction is very common, and in many species males are rare.
Eg:Thrips
Chilli thrip-Scirtothrips dorsais
Tobacco thrip-Thrips tabaci
ORDER : HEMIPTERA (Hemi: half thickened, Ptera: Wings)
I.Sub-Order- Heteroptera
Head Prognathous.
Antennae fairly long with 4-5 segments
Compound eyes well developed, 2 ocelli may be present/absent
piercing and sucking type of mouth parts
Pronotum Large, while meso- and meta-notum are relatively small
Forewings are called as Hemielytra The hindwings are membranous and folded beneath the
hemielytra at rest. wings are usually held flat over the body
Scent glands are present
Ovipositor with 3 pairs of valves
Eg:True bugs
Stink Bug-Nezara viridula
Red Cotton bug-Dysdercus cingulatus
II.Sub-Order- Homoptera
Head Hypognathous / opisthognathous
Antennae 3-10 segmented
Compound eyes well developed, 2 ocelli may be present/absent
piercing and sucking type of mouth parts
forewings are uniform texture entirely sclerotized with no membranous tip.
Wings are held over the body like a tent
Wax glands are present
Abdomen 11 segments; first 2 segments are modified for sound production
Eg:Leaf Hoppers, Plant hoppers , Aphids, Mealy bugs, Scale insects , Whiteflies
Rice green leaf hopper-Nephotettix virescens
Castor whitefly-Trialeurodes ricini
ORDER : LEPIDOPTERA (Lepido: Scales, Ptera: Wings, Scaly winged Insects)
Head relatively small
Large compound eyes, ocelli two in numbers
Siphoning type of Mouth parts in Adults(long coiled proboscis formed by the galea of maxilla,
mandibles are absent). Chewing and biting type in larva.
Two pairs of membranous wings covered with scales giving beautiful color patterns. A large cell
called distal cell is formed in the forewing due to the absence of stems of R4, R5 and the main
stem of the median vein.
scales known as androconia occur on upper surface of the wings in males and serve as the outlets
of odoriferous glands.
Larvae are called caterpillars (true legs in thorax and non-segmented legs in 3,4,5,6 and 10th
Abdominal segments )
Pupae are usually adecticus, obtect
Adults Harmless, except citrus fruit sucking moths, and castor semilooper
Complete metamorphosis
Character Butterflies Moths
Size Bigger smaller
Antenna Clubbed/clavate Bipectinate antenna
antenna
Wing brightly colored wings. dull colored wings.
Pupa No cocoon-Chrysalis Cocoon
Activity Diurnal Nocturnal or crepuscular
Ex: American bollworm/Gram caterpillar- Helicoverpa armigera
Tobacco caterpillar-Spodoptera litura
ORDER : COLEOPTERA (Coleo: Sheath, Ptera : Wings, Sheathed winged Insects)
Head is highly sclerotized, normal in beetles or prolongated into snout in weevils
Antennae usually 11 segmented
Mouth parts are Chewing and biting type
Prothorax large and freely movable. Mesothorax much reduced and fused with metathorax
Forewings are horny, leathery and not used for flight known as elytra, Hind wings are
membranous
Tarsal segments are variable.
Larvae are known as grubs-oligopod or apodous
Pupa Exarate,
Metamorphosis Complete and complex
Eg:Mango stemborer-Batocera rufomaculata
Coccinellid beetle-Coccinella septumpunctata
ORDER: HYMENOPTERA ((Hymen: membrane, ptera: wings, membranous winged Insects)
Compound eyes are large- acuteness of vision is a characteristic feature of the order
Mouthparts either chewing type or chewing and lapping type.
Two pairs of membranous wings. Hind wings interlocked with fore wings by means of row of
tiny hooks (hamuli) along the costal margin.
Trochanter 1 or 2 segmented.
First abdominal segment which is attached to thorax is called propodaeum. The 2nd abdominal
segment is constricted called petiole or pedicel, while all the other abdominal segments are
collectively called gaster.
Ovipositor is well developed and modified for sawing, boring and piercing.
Larvae of majority of advanced hymenoptera closely resemble maggots while primitive
hymenoptera(eg :sawflies) resemble caterpillars
Exarate pupa and a cocoon is generally present.
Complete Metamorphosis
Eg:WASPS, ANTS, BEES, SAWFLIES
Indian honey bee-Apis cerana indica
Red ant-Oecophylla smaragdina
ORDER: DIPTERA (Di: two; ptera: wings; two winged insects)
Head Prominent and small neck
Compound Eyes Large, Ptilinum or frontal sac is present
Mostly 3 segmented Antenna ,aristate in flies, plumose & pilose in mosquitoes
Sucking type of Mouth parts. In mosquitoes-piercing and sucking type, House flies-sponging &
lapping type
Mesothorax Large. Prothoracic and Meta thoracic segments are small
Only front pair of wings present. Hind pair modified into halteres which act as balancers
Tarsus usually 5 segmented, pulvilli and an empodium usually present
Metamorphosis Complete
Larva Eruciform, apodous, known as maggots,
coarctate Pupa enclosed in puparium
Eg: TRUE FLIES, MOSQUITOES, MIDGES
Rice gall midge-Orseolia oryzae
Jowar shootfly-Atherigona soccata
Cockroach (Periplaneta americana) - External Characters
Periplaneta americana: linneaus (1758) named as blatta Americana. Barmyster (1838)
proposed the genus periplaneta. It is present in all over world. They are omnivorous and
scavenger insects
Classification:
Kingdom: Animalia
Phylum: Arthropoda
Class: Insecta
Order: Blattodea
Family: Blattidae
Genus: Periplaneta
Species: P. americana
The cockroach is divided into three sections; the body is flattened and broadly oval, with
a shield-like pronotum covering its head. A pronotum is a plate-like structure that covers all or
part of the dorsal surface of the thorax of certain insects. They also have chewing mouth parts,
long, segmented antennae, and leathery fore wings with delicate hind wings. The third section of
the cockroach is the abdomen.
1. Segmentation:
The body shows three regions or tagmata that includes
the head, thorax and abdomen. Embryologically, the body is formed of 20
segments. First 6 segments formed the head, next 3 segments formed the thorax
and remaining 11 segments formed the abdomen. Only 10 segments are retained in
the abdomen of the adult, in which only the first 7 are distinct in females, and the
first 9 are distinct in males. The anus is located at the end of the abdomen and it is
a 10th modified segment.
2. Head:
a. Head Capsule:
Cockroach head is triangular and is formed by a fusion of 6 chitinous or
sclerite plates.The head is bent downwards in a hypognathous position, i.e., at an
angle of 900 from the long axis of the body. All sclerites of the head fuse to form
a head capsule. The cockroach posses the following sclerites.
1. Labrum : It is small sclerite that forms the upper lip of the mouth cavity. It is freely attached or
suspended from the lower margin of the clypeus
2.Clypeus: It is situated above the labrum and is divided in to anterior ante-clypeus and
posterior post-clypeus.
3. Frons : It is the facial part of the insect consisting of median ocellus.
4. Vertex : It is the top portion of the head behind the frons or the area between the two
compound eyes.
5. Epicraniun : It is the upper part of the head extending from vertex to occipital suture.
6. Occiput : It is an inverted “U” shaped structure representing the area between the epicranium
and post occiput.
7. Post occiput : It is the extreme posterior part of the insect head that remains before the
neck region.
8. Gena : It is the area extending from below the compound eyes to just above the mandibles
9. Occular sclerites : These are cuticular ring like structures present around each compound
eye
10. Antennal sclerites : These form the basis for the antennae and present around the scape
which are well developed in Plecoptera (stone flies)
All the above sclerites gets attached through cuticular ridges or sutures to provide the
attachment for the muscles inside.
b. Appendages of Head:
The cockroarch head consist the following appendages
S.No Segment Appendages
1 Pre antennary segment No appendages
2 Antennary segment Antennae
3 Intercalary segment No appendages
4 Mandibular segment Mandibles
5 First maxillary segment Maxillae
6 Second maxillary/labial segment Labium
A pair of antennae arises from the membranous sockets, i.e. antennal sockets
that present in front of the eyes can move in all directions, and they are very
sensitive. Each antenna is formed of 3 segments i.e.
scape (largest), pedicel (narrow and elongated) and flagellum (the long and
slender part which has many jointed parts, bearing tactile sensory setae). These
antennae act as sense organs of touch and smell.
c. Mouthparts:
cockroach is having the 'biting and chewing' type of mouthparts. These mouth parts consists of
labrum, a pair of mandibles, a pair of first maxillae, labium or pair of second maxillae and
hypopharynx.
a. Labrum: It is a small sclerite that forms the upper lip of the mouth cavity. It protects the
mandibles and helps in closing of the mouth cavity and guide the food in to mouth. On its
inner surface, labrum consists of lobe like structure called labrum – epipharynx which is
well developed. Labrum hangs down from the clypeus through a clypeo-labral suture.
b. Mandibles: These are the paired, unsegmented, strongest and sclerotized structures called
jaws. They are attached to the head capsule by means of two joints known as ginglymus and
condyle. They possess teeth like molars and incisors that help in the process of cutting the
food material. Each mandible is moved by powerful Abductor and adductor muscles.
c. Maxillae: These are paired homologous structures with basal triangular ‘cardo’, middle
rectangular ‘stipes’ and the lateral ‘palpifer’ bearing maxillary palpi and lobe like inner
‘lacinia’ and outer ‘galea’.Maxillary palps possess olfactory and gustatory sense receptors
and function as sensory organs . These Galea and lacinia helps in holding the food material
along with the mandibles.
d. Labium: It is known as lower lip and is also called as second maxillae. It closes the mouth
cavity from below.It is divided in to proximal prementum. central mentum and distal
submentum Near the base of pre mentum, on either side lobe like ‘palpiger’ is present which
bears labial palps. Prementum has four terminal lobes. The median pair is ‘glossae’ and
outer ‘paraglossae’ together called ligula that function mainly as gustatory sense organs.
e. Hypopharynx : It is a tongue like structure situated between labrum and labium and ducts of
salivary glands open on or near its base.
3. Neck:
The Neck grease is a short slender feature that attacks to the head. The base is supported by
a pair of posterior and two greiva plaques in the abdomen the muscles of the neck help the head.
To rotate all the sides
4. Thorax : It is the middle part of the body consisting of three segments each possessing a
pair of legs and a pair of wings on meso and meta thoracic segment. Meso and meta thoracic
segments together known as pterothorax. Sclerite of dorsal region of thorax is tergum or
notum in case of winged insect, ventral region is called sternum and lateral region is called
pleuron.
a. Cockroach Leg : All the three thoracic segments of an insect possess a pair of legs as
locomotory organs giving the name hexapods and the class insecta as hexapoda. Insect leg
mainly consists of 5 parts viz. Coxa , Trochanter, Femur , Tibia and. Tarsus.
1.Coxa: It is the functional basal segment and it is rigidly fixed to thorax or weakly articulated.
2. Trochanter : It is very small and the second segment. It is articulated with coxa and more or
less fixed to femur.
3. Femur : It is the largest, strongest segment and is articulated with the tibia..
4. Tibia : It is equal or more than the length of the femur, articulated with tarsus.
5.Tarsus : it is the largest segment of the leg and usually devided into sub segments tarsomeres.
The number of tarsomeres vary from 1-5 and are movable one on the other. Among the 5
segments, 1st segment is large, big or broad in size known as basitarsus. The tarsus at it’s end
consists of pretarsus which is in the form of a pair of claws and cushion like pulvilli. In between
the claws, if there is lobe like structure, it is known as “aroleum” and if it is bristle like structure,
it is called “empodium”.
b) Wing:
These are two pairs; the first pair is mesothoracic – attached with the tergum of the
mesothorax and the second pair is metathoracic – connected with the tergum of the metathorax.
Mesothoracic Wings are also called wing-covers or tegmina or elytra. These are thick, large,
leathery, dark coloured opaque in structure which are narrow at the distal end. They are not used
for flight but cover and protect metathoracic wings. Metathoracic wings are very delicate,
transparent, thin and membranous with a broad terminal end. These wings are used for flight, but
in the resting position, they lie folded below the tegmina.
5.Abdomen:
There are 10 tergites in both males and females. Ventrally, the abdomen has only 9
sternites in males and seven in females. In females, the last, i.e., 7th sternite, is larger and boat-
shaped. Together with the indistinct 8th and sternites, it forms a chamber-like structure called
gynatrium. The posterior part of gynatrium is called the oothecal chamber because ootheca is
formed in it. Behind this chamber, the 7th sternite bifurcates into two prominent oval plates called
gynovalvularplates or apical lobes. These Abdominal segments lack locomotory appendages. At
the posterior end, however, there are certain small structures associated with the gonopore. These
are different in both sexes. It includes anal cerci, anal styles and gonapophyses. Anal Cerci are
paired and jointed outgrowths that arise from the 10th tergum. These are sensitive to sound and
other vibrations. Anal Styles are also paired but thin and small unjointed outgrowths that projects
backwardly from the sides of the 9th sternum of male cockroach only and these are also sensitive
to touch. Gonapophyses are present in both males and females; the genital aperture is surrounded
by some sclerites called gonapophyses. In males, they arise from the 9th segment and form the
external genitalia or external genital organs to help the insect in the copulation process. In female
cockroaches, gonapophysis belongs to the 8th and 9th abdominal segments to form an ovipositor.
The latter is used to guide the fertilized eggs towards the oothecal chamber for ootheca
formation.
Mouth parts of insects
These are the organs primarily concerned with the uptake of food. Typical mouthpart of
an insect consists of the following parts. (i) Labrum (upper lip) (ii) A pair of mandibles (iii) A
pair of maxillae (iv) Labium (lower lip) (v) Hypopharynx (tongue)
The mouth parts of insects can be basically grouped in to following types based on the
type of food and method of feeding.
S.No Type of Mouth parts Examples
I Biting and chewing type Grasshoppers, cockroaches
II Sucking type / Haustellate type
1. Piercing and sucking type Plant Bugs and Mosquitoes
2. Rasping and sucking type Thrips
3. Sponging type Adult Houseflies
4. Chewing and lapping type Honey bees
5. Siphoning type Butterflies and moths
III Other types
1. Mask type Naids of Dragonflies
2. Degenerate type Maggots of Diptera
I. Biting and chewing type of Mouth Parts:
This type is considered as primitive and found in Orthoptera, Isoptera and Coleoptera,
larvae of Lepidoptera and Neuroptera etc.
The mouth parts include following parts
a. Labrum : It is a small sclerite that forms the upper lip of the mouth cavity. It protects the
mandibles and helps in closing of the mouth cavity and guide the food in to mouth. On its
inner surface, labrum consists of lobe like structure called labrum – epipharynx which is
well developed in Hymenoptera. Labrum hangs down from the clypeus through a
clypeo-labral suture.
b. Mandibles: These are the paired, unsegmented, strongest and sclerotized structures
called jaws. They are attached to the head capsule by means of two joints known as
ginglymus and condyle. They possess teeth like molars and incisors that help in the
process of cutting the food material. Each mandible is moved by powerful Abductor and
adductor muscles.
c. Maxillae: These are paired homologous structures with basal triangular ‘cardo’, middle
rectangular ‘stipes’ and the lateral ‘palpifer’ bearing maxillary palpi and lobe like inner
‘lacinia’ and outer ‘galea’. Maxillary palps possess olfactory and gustatory sense
receptors and function as sensory organs . These. Galea and lacinia helps in holding the
food material along with the mandibles.
d. Labium: It is known as lower lip and is also called as second maxillae. It closes the
mouth cavity from below. It is divided in to proximal prementum. central mentum and
distal submentum Near the base of pre mentum, on either side lobe like ‘palpiger’ is
present which bears labial palps. Prementum has four terminal lobes. The median pair is
‘glossae’ and outer ‘paraglossae’ together called ligula that function mainly as gustatory
sense organs.
e. Hypopharynx: It is a tongue like structure situated between labrum and labium and
ducts of salivary glands open on or near its base.
II. Sucking type of Mouth Parts:
This is considered as advanced type where the oral appendages get modified differently.
1. Piercing and sucking type e.g.: plant bugs, mosquitoes
They are mainly adopted for piercing the tissues and sucking either plant sap or the nectar
or blood from the host. Mouth parts are represented by rostrum/beak which is a modification of
Labium . It acts as a pouch for protecting the mandibular and maxillary stylets. Mandibles and
maxillae are modified in to sharp needle like stylets. The mandibular stylets form the outer pair
and possess serrated margins at their tip. The maxillary stylets forms the inner pair having
smooth curved tips and combine together enclosing a food channel. The food channel is divided
in to an upper cibarium and lower salivarium with the help of the grooves present inside the
maxillary stylets. Salivarium is used for releasing the saliva and cibarium is used for sucking the
sap. The hypopharynx is modified in to a pharyngeal pump and is situated at the tip of the food
channel. Llabrum is modified into a small flap like structure at the base of rostrum. Insects with
these type of mouthparts pierce the tissues with the mandibular stylets and suck the contents
(sap/ blood / nectar) through cibarium with the action of pharyngeal and cibarial muscles.
Cross section
Piercing and sucking type
2. Rasping and sucking type of Mouth Parts : e.g. thrips
These are called asymmetrical type , since right mandible is rudimentary . They are in
between the biting – chewing type; and piercing - sucking type. Mouth parts are represented by
mouth cone which is formed by the labrum and clypeus above and labium below. Within the
beak/mouth cone hypopharynx and left mandible is present. Right mandible is absent where as
the left mandible is modified in to a mandibular stylet. Maxillae are modified in to maxillary
stylets which are mainly useful for sucking the sap that is released outside due to the rasping of
tissues by the left mandible.
3. Sponging type of Mouth Parts: eg: housefly
These mouthparts are represented by proboscis formed from the labium. The proboscis is
divided into a basal rostrum, middle haustellum and a distal labellum. The labellum is a sponge
like structure. It is traversed by a number of narrow transverse channels called pseudotrachea
which converge at one point in the centre of the labellum. From this point, the food enters in to
food channel which is formed by the labrum- epipharynx and hypopharynx. Mandibles are
absent (reduced) maxillary palpi are 1-3 segmented. During feeding, the proboscis is pressed
over the food material. The pseudo trachea gets filled with the food material by the capillary
action and is sucked up from the central point in to the oesophagus.
Sponging type of Mouth Parts
5. Siphoning type of Mouth parts : eg: butterflies
These are specially modified for taking nectar from the flowers. The galea of maxilla
form into a slender, hollow, tubular structure which remains as an elongated coiled proboscis
underneath the head during non feeding. Mandibles are totally absent. The labrum and maxilla
palpi are reduced. Labium is modified in to a small basal plate possessing a three segmented
labial palpi. The food channel is formed by the fusion of both the galea. The nectar will be
sucked from the flowers through muscular action.
Siphoning type of mouthparts
Damage symptoms of different Pests and their different kinds of losses
1. Root Grub/ feeders: Larvae feed on roots/root nodules resulting in stunted growth/poor
tillering /drying of plants in isolated patches.
Eg: Rice root weevil, White Grub and Banana Rhizome weevil
2. Stem borers: Larvae enter in to the stem and feed on internal contents. As a result,
damaged part is cut off from the main plant and affected part wilts, dries up and exhibits
symptoms like dead heart during vegetative stage and white ear during reproductive stage
in case of paddy due to larval feeding inside the stem and they can be easily pulled out
and bunchy top in case of sugarcane (destruction of growing point results in the
activation of side buds, just below the growing point and produces a bunch of side shoots
called bunchy top).
Eg: Stem borers of paddy, millets, sugarcane and brinjal
3. Shoot borers: Larvae attack tender shoots and bore inside during vegetative stage of crop
growth and cause wilting, drooping of terminal plant parts which later dry up.
Eg: Shoot borers of brinjal, bhendi, cotton and castor
4. Defoliators/Skeletonizers: Larvae feed on the leaves completely leaving only
midrib/veins or scrape the chlorophyll content of leaves or cause numerous holes.
Eg: Castor semilooper, ash weevils, tobacco caterpillar, epilachna beetle on brinjal.
5. Leaf miners: Larvae mine leaves/leaflets between the epidermal layers and feed on
greenish matter, resulting in the appearance of translucent mines/white patches/zig-zag
galleries
Eg: leaf miners of citrus, Cashew and Rice hispa.
6. Leaf Webbers: Larvae webs leaves/leaflets by means of silken threads and feed on the
chlorophyll content by remaining within the web. Often faecal pellets/frass are found
within the web.
Eg: Leaf Webbers on gingelly, groundnut, sapota, mango and cashew shoot and blossom
webber.
7. Leaf folders: Larvae fold leaves from tip to base /longitudinally /margin to margin there
by giving appearance of a fold/roll and scrape the chlorophyll content remaining within
the fold.
Eg: rice leaf folder, Cotton leaf roller (Bell shaped rolling of leaf).
8. Galls: Larvae feeding inside the stem/tiller/leaf/flower bud stimulates excessive growth
of cells at the affected portion and distorts normal growth. It results in malformation of
plant parts, exhibiting gall formation and gives shelter for the pest.
Eg: Rice gall midge
9. Fruit borers: Larvae enter into the tender fruits and feed on fresh matter/pulp and plug the
larval burrow with excreta.
Eg: Fruit borer of brinjal/bhendi/tomato, mango stone weevil, Cashew apple and nut
borer.
10. Bark borers: Larvae remain in a small tunnel at the axils of branches, under the bark
constructing galleries of frassy web on the stem and near bark/angles of branches and
move about, conceal inside the silken gallery and feed on the bark by scraping.
Eg: Bark eating caterpillars of citrus, mango, guava, casuarina, jack etc.
11. Tree borers: Larvae bore deep into the tree trunk, make the tunnels in zig-zag manner and
feed on inner tissues, arresting translocation of sap to top portions of tree, there by the
tree exhibits symptoms like yellowing, withering of leaves, drying of twigs or complete
drying of tree. Sometimes, gummy material oozes from the affected portion on the tree
trunk. Eg: Tree borers of mango, cashew, coconut red palm weevil etc
12. Seed feeders (Stored grain pests): Grubs/larvae and adults feed on stored seeds either
internally /externally by webbing the food particles.
Eg: Rice weevil, red flour beetle, rice moth etc.,
13. Boll worms: During the reproductive stage of the crop larvae enter in to the pods,
capsules and feed on the seeds/lint exhibiting symptoms like webbed condition of pods
/bolls or web few pods/capsules with frass and excreta or holes of different sizes and
shapes/damaged tissues (chilli/lint on Cotton).
Eg: Bollworms in cotton.
14. Sucking Pests: Some pest in different stages attacks different parts of plants and sucks
the sap and cause the damage to the plants
Types of sucking pest:
A. SEEDS: Nymphs and adults attacks the developing seeds and sucks the sap from seeds
and seeds will loss their vigour.
Eg: paddy and jowar sucking pest.
B. Tender parts of plants/leaves: Both nymphs and adults suck sap from base of the plant
/leaves /tender terminal plant parts and thereby affect the vigour and growth of plants. In
case of severe infestation, sooty mould develops on plant parts covered with honey dew
excreted by insects while feeding. Different insects exhibit different symptoms.
Damage Symptoms with Examples:
a) Sooty mould – Rice Brown plant hopper
b) Curling of leaf margins/with necrotic patches Starting from leaf margin –Cotton leaf hopper
c) Upward Curling- Chilli thrips
d) Downward Curling: Chilli Mite.
e) Uniform yellowing of leaves from mid half-Paddy leaf hopper
f) Reduced vigour/sooty mold, square/boll drop -White flies on cotton
g) Yellowing /reduced/stunted growth/sooty mould -Aphids
h) Shriveled/chaffy and discolored grains/sooty mould on grain-Sorghum ear head bug/rice
gundhy bug
i).Mottled appearance with yellow patches on infested leaves/sooty mould/undeveloped grains
on infested ear heads -Sorghum aphids
j) Holes on fruits / covered by excreta - fruit Flys
k) Decomposing of Fruits / Brown marks on fruits- Fruits sucking pest.
INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM)
Modern concept of pest management is based on ecological principles and integration of
different control tactics into a pest management system
Integrated control was defined by Stern et al., (1959) as applied pest control which
combines and integrates the biological and chemical control. Later the concept of pest
management has gained importance.
In 1972 the term IPM was accepted by CEQ (Council of Environmental Quality) where
IPM includes
I - Integration that is harmonious use of multiple methods to control the impact of single pest
as well as multiple pests.
P - Pest- any organism that is detrimental to humans including vertebrates and invertebrate or
weed or pathogens.
M - Management refers to a set of decisions or rules based on ecological principles, economic
and social consideration.
According to FAO (1967), IPM was defined as “a pest management system in the context
of associated environment and population dynamics in pest species. It utilizes all suitable
techniques and methods in as compatible manner as possible and maintains the pest population at
levels below those cause economic injury.
OR
Protective management of the noxious pest in which all available techniques should be
evaluated and consolidated to manage pest population so that economic damage is avoided and
adverse side effects on the environment are minimized (Gieir and Clark, 1961).
IPM CONTROL METHODS:
In IPM There are two types of control methods
1. NATURAL CONTROL:
(a). Climatic conditions :
Climatic conditions are very important for natural control of pests. Are
effectively.Rains,the resulting soft soil are required for some types of caterpillar for the transition
to the pupal stage and for their adults to come out of soil. however, heavy rains can reduce the
intensity of sucking pest like thrips&aphid. Similarly, if the temperature &humidity is not
favourable in the air pest infestation will reduce.
(b). Natural enemies :
Each insect has many natural enemies in nature. They can feed on insects and control them. They
are called as predators , parasites. Some types of viruses, bacteria and fungi, can infect insects
and cause infections. Therefore , the insect progeny is avoided in a natural way.
(c). Natural barriers :
Geological conditions like hills and oceans arrest the spread of insects. Soil type can also prevent
the development of insects. example, rootgrubs are more common in light soils and red soils, but
can not develop in black clay soils.
2. Artificial control :
Any factor that is capable of making life hard for the insect that will repel or interfere
with its feeding, mating, reproduction or dispersal can be taken as a method of insect control in
its broadest application.
They can be divided into two major categories
1. Natural control
2. Applied control
Under natural control the population is kept under check by the environmental
resistance without the interference of man. The control measures adopted by human agency are
called applied or artificial control measures.
Artificial control methods are divided into 6 types given below
1. Cultural methods
2. Mechanical methods
3. Physical methods
4. Biological methods
5. Legislative methods
6. Chemical methods
Cultural Methods of Pest Control:
The manipulation of cultural practices at an appropriate time for reducing or avoiding
pest damage to crops is known as cultural control.
The cultural practices make the environment less favorable for the pests and or more
favorable for its natural enemies. It is the cheapest of all methods.
1. Proper preparatory cultivation: Several insects which live or hide in the soil get
exposed to sun as well as predators like birds etc due to Proper preparatory cultivation.
Eg.Pupae of moths, roots grubs etc.
2. Clean cultivation: Removal of weeds which act as alternate hosts.
Eg. Paddy gall fly Orseolia oryzae breeds on grasses such as Panicum sp. Cynodon
dactylon etc.
Fruit sucking moth larvae Eudocima ancilla on weeds of Menispermaceae
3. Systematic cutting and removal of infested parts: Keeps down subsequent infestation.
Eg. i. Removal of sugarcane shoots affected by borers
ii. Cutting and removal of infested parts of brinjal attacked by Leucinodes orbonalis
iii. Pruning of dried branches of citrus eliminates scales and stem borer.
iv. Clipping of tips of rice seedlings before transplanting eliminate the egg masses of
stem borer.
v. Clipping of leaf lets in coconut reduces the black headed caterpillar
4. Changes in the system of cultivation: Change of banana from perennial to annual crop
reduced the infestation of banana rhizome weevil Cosmopolitus sordidus in addition to giving
increased yields.
Eg: Avoiding ratoon redgram crop during offseason helps in reducing the carry over of
pod fly Melangromyza obtusa and eriophyid mite Aceria cajani
4. Crop rotation: Crop rotation is most effective practice against pests that have a narrow
host range and dispersal capacity. Lady’s finger followed by cotton will suffer from
increased infestation of pests. Hence if a non-host crop is grown after a host crop, it
reduces the pest population.
Eg. i. Cereals followed by pulses.
ii. Cotton should be rotated with non hosts like ragi, maize, rice to minimize the
incidence insect pests.
iii. Groundnut with non leguminous crops is recommended for minimizing the
leaf miner incidence.
5. Mixed cropping: Intended for getting some return when one crop is attacked, the other
escapes. Eg. Garden peas and sunhemp
6. Growing resistant varieties: certain varieties resists pest attack .
Eg: GEB-24 and MTU–5249 resistance to paddy BPH, Surekha variety to gall
midge, TKM -6 and Ratna for stem borer.
7. Adjusting planting or sowing or harvesting times to avoid certain pests : The
manipulation of planting time helps to minimize pest damage by producing asynchrony
between host plants and the pest or synchronizing insect pests with their natural enemies.
Eg. i. Early planting of paddy in kharif and late planting in rabi minimize
the infestation of rice stem borer.
ii. Delaying the sowing of sun hemp till the onset of South West
monsoon avoids sun hemp hairy caterpillar (Utethesia lotrix) attack.
iii. Early sown sorghum in kharif reduces the infestation of shoot fly
iv. Timely and synchronous planting has been found to reduce
bollworm damage in cotton and stem borer damage in sugarcane.
8. Trap cropping: Growing of susceptible or preferred plants by important pests near a
major crop to act as a trap and later it is destroyed or treated with insecticides. Trap crop
may also attract natural enemies thus enhancing natural control.
Eg: Trap crop Main crop Insect pest
Castor Chillies Tobacco caterpillar Spodoptera litura
Tomato Citrus Fruit sucking moths Otheris spp
Marigold Cotton American bollworm
(Helicoverpa armigera)
9. Trimming field buds: Grasshopper eggs, which are laid in field bunds, are destroyed by
trimming field bunds.
10. Alley ways: Formation of alley ways for every 2 m in rice field reduces the BPH
Mechanical Methods of Pest Control
Reduction or suppression of insect pest population by means of manual devices or labour.
1. Hand picking and collection with hand nets and killing insects: Handpicking is most
ancient method which can prove fairly effective under certain conditions. Egg masses,
larvae or nymphs and sluggish adults can be handpicked and destroyed.
Eg: 1. Egg masses of paddy stem borer and groundnut hairy caterpillar.
2. Early stages of Spodoptera litura
2. Provision of preventive barriers: Digging of 30 -60 cm wide and 60 cm deep trenches
or erecting 30 cm height tin sheets barriers around the fields is useful against pests like
hairy caterpillars.
3. Bagging / wrapping of pomegranate and mango fruits in paper bags avoids the
infestation of pomegranate butterfly and mango fruit fly
4. Tin bands are fixed over coconut palms to prevent damage by rats.
5. Extraction of adult Rhinoceros beetle (Oryctes rhinoceros) from the crown of coconut
trees using an arrow headed rod/hook.
6. Use of an alkathene band around the tree trunks of mango to check the migration of first
instar nymphs of mealybugs and red ants.
7. Systematic shaking of root grub adults harbored trees during evening hours to dislodge
and destroy by dumping in fire.
8. Shaking of redgram plants to collect and destroy later instars of Helicoverpa armigera
9. Light traps are arranged for attracting the insects, which are trapped by keeping water or
oil in a container or a killing bottle below the light trap. Light traps are useful for
monitoring the population of important insect pests in an area. Eg: Most of the moths and
beetles.
10. Flame thrower is a compressed air sprayer with kerosene oil for producing flames.
There is a lance, which is fitted with a burner. When the burner is heated, the kerosene oil
is released and it turns into flames. Used for burning locust populations, congregation of
caterpillars, patches of weeds etc.
Physical Methods of Pest Control
Use of certain physical forces to minimize the pests
1. A material called drie-die, consist of highly porous, finely divided silica gel which when
applied
abrades the insect cuticle thus encouraging loss of moisture resulting in death. It is mainly
used against stored product pests.
2. Kaolinic clay after successive activation with acid and heat can be mixed with stored
grain. The
clay minerals absorb the lipoid layer of the insect cuticle by which the insects lose their body
moisture and die due to desiccation.
3. Artificial heating and cooling of stored products will prevent insect damage. Usually high
temperatures are more effective than low temperatures.
4. Stored products can be exposed to 55°C for 3 hours to avoid stored product pests
5. Vapour Heat Treatment (VHT): Heated air is saturated with water (>RH 90%) for
specified period of 6 to 8 hours for raising pulp temperature to 43-44.5°C in case of mango
against fruit flies.
Legislative / Legal / Regulatory Methods of Pest Control :
`In early days there were no restrictions on the transport of plants and animals from one
country to another since the danger involved in it is not realized, which resulted in introduction
of pests form one country to another. In many countries many of the dangerous pests have
frequently been found to be foreign pests and they inflict greater damage than the indigenous
ones.
Plant quarantine is defined as the legal enforcement of the measures aimed to prevent
pests from spreading or to prevent them to multiply further in case they have already gained
entry and have established in new restricted areas.
The importance of imposing restrictions on the movement of pest-infested plants or plant
materials from one country to another was realized when the grapevine phylloxera got
introduced into France from America by about 1860 and the San jose scale spread into the USA
in the later part of the 18th century and caused severe damage.
The first Quarantine Act in USA came into operation in 1905. While Govt. of India
passed an Act in 1914 entitled “Destructive Insect and Pests Act of 1914” to prevent the
introduction of any insect, fungus or other pests into our country. This was later supplemented by
a more comprehensive act in 1917.
The legislative measures in force now in different countries can be grouped into five
classes. They are,
1. Legislation to prevent the introduction of new pests and weeds etc from foreign countries
(International quarantine)
2. Legislation to prevent the spread of already established pests, diseases and weeds from
one part of the country to another (Domestic quarantine)
3. Legislation to enforce upon the farmers regarding the application of effective control
measures to prevent damage by already established pests.
4. Legislation to prevent the adulteration and misbranding of insecticides
5. Legislation to regulate the activities of men engaged in pest control operations and
application of hazardous insecticides
1) Legislation to prevent the introduction of foreign pests:
To prevent the entry of foreign pests all countries have restrictions. They enforce quarantine
laws. The imported plant material has to be thoroughly examined at the ports of entry. The
Directorate of Plant Protection Quarantine and Storage (DPPQS) was established in Faridababd
in 1946. Prior to which customs authorities did the enforcement of quarantine laws. From 1949,
DPPQS deals with the commercial import of consignments of grains, plants and plant products
for consumption through its network of 35 Plant Quarantine Stations spread across the country
including seaports, airports and land frontiers. These operate under the provisions made under
the “Destructive Insect and Pests Act of 1914”. The importation of plant material from foreign
countries has to be done only through any of these ports. The consignment should also be
accompanied with the certificate issued by the Officers of agriculture department of the
exporting country so as confirm that the consignments are pest free. This certificate is called as
‘Phytosanitory certificate’.
2) Legislation to prevent the spread of already established pests:
The Destructive Insect and Pests Act, 1914, have empowered the states to enact such
laws as are necessary to prevent the spread of dangerous insects within their jurisdiction. The
Madras Government enacted the Madras Agricultural Pests and Diseases act in 1919 and was the
first state to enact such laws in our country. This act was passed to prevent the spread of pests or
diseases or weeds form one part of the state to another.
3) Legislation to enforce the application of effective control measures to prevent the
damage by established pests.
Under the state pests act, the farmers were asked to remove and destroy coconut leaf lets
infested with black headed caterpillar around Mangalore in 1923 and in 1927 in Krishna and
Guntur districts.
4) Legislation to prevent the adulteration and misbranding of the insecticides
To avoid malpractices and supply of substandard chemicals and pesticide products the
Insecticide Act, 1968 has been enforced on 2nd September, 1968 by the Government of India to
regulate the import, manufacture, sale, transport and distribution and use of insecticides. The
insecticide rules of 1971 framed under the Insecticides Act 1968 had come in to force in 1971.
5) Legislation to regulate the activities of men engaged in pest control operations:
They have to take certain precautionary measures to avoid pesticide poisoning and undergo
regular medical checkup.
BIOLOGICAL CONTROL
The successful management of a pest by means of another living organism (parasitoids,
predators and pathogens) that is encouraged and disseminated by man is called biological
control.
Parasite:A parasite is an organism which is usually much smaller than its host and a
single individual usually doesn’t kill the host. Parasite may complete their entire life cycle (eg.
Lice) or may involve several host species. (or)
Parasite is one, which attaches itself to the body of the other living organism either
externally or internally and gets nourishment and shelter at least for a shorter period if not for
the entire life cycle. The organism, which is attacked by the parasites, is called hosts.
Control of cottony cushion scale, Icerya purchasi on fruit trees by its predatory vedalia
beetle, Rodolia cardinalis in Nilgiris. The predator was imported from California in 1929 and
from Egypt in 1930 and multiplied in the laboratory and released. Within one year the pest was
effectively checked.
Apple woolly aphis, Eriosoma lanigerum in Coonor area by Aphelinus mali
(parasitoid).
Control of shoot borers of sugarcane, cotton bollworms, stem borers of paddy and
sorghum with the egg parasitoid, Trichogramma australicum @ 50,000/ha/week for 4-5 weeks
from one month after planting
Predators: A predator is one which catches and devours smaller or more helpless
creatures by killing them in getting a single meal. It is a free living organism throughout its life,
normally larger than prey and requires more than one prey to develop.
MICROBIAL CONTROL
Microbial control refers to the exploitation of disease causing organism to reduce the
population of insect pest below the damaging levels.
1. Bacteria : More than 100 pathogenic bacteria were recorded of which i. Bacillus
thuringiensis (B.t.) is important. B.t. known as a bacterial insecticide is now being using
by farmers mostly on lepidopterous larvae. It can infect more than 150 species of
insects. The entry of the bacteria is by ingestion of the bacteria, which infect the mid gut
epithelia cells and enter the haemolymph to sporulate and cause septicemia.
2. Viruses: NPV : About 300 isolates of Nuclear polyhedral virus have been isolated from
the order Lepidoptera. Among these viruses Baculoviruses (Baculoviridae) are
successful in IPM. The NPV is observed to affect 200 species of insects by ingestion.
The virus infected dead larvae hanging upside down from plant parts (Tree top disease).
The cuticle becomes fragile, rupturing easily when touched, discharges liquefied body
fluids. NPV multiplies in insect body wall, trachea, fat bodies and blood cells. The
polyhedra are seen in nuclei. The polyhedral bodies enlarge in size destroying the host
nuclei to get released into the insect body cavity.
3. Fungi:The fungal disease occurrence in insects is commonly called as mycosis. Most
of the entomopathogenic fungi infect the host through the cuticle. Most of the
entomopathogenic fungi infect their hosts by penetration of the cuticle by producing
cuticle digesting enzymes ( Proteases , lipases chitinases).The typical symptoms of
fungal infection are, mummified body of insects and it does not disintegrate in water
and body covered with filamentous mycelium.
Important species are Metarhizium, Beauveria, Nomuraea and Verticillium.
CHEMICAL CONTROL
Control of insects with chemicals is known is chemical control. The term
pesticide is used to those chemicals which kill pests and these pests may include insects,
animals, mites, diseases or even weeds. Chemicals which kill insects are called as
insecticides.
Insecticide may be defined as a substance or mixture of substances intended to
kill, repel or otherwise prevent the insects. Similarly pesticides include nematicides –
which kill nematodes, miticides or Acaricides which kill mites, Rodenticides – which
kill rats, weedicides- that kill weeds,Fungicides- that kill fungus etc.
Importance of chemical control:
Insecticides are the most powerful tools available for use in pest management.
They are highly effective, rapid in curative action, adoptable to most situations, flexible
in meeting changing agronomic and ecological conditions and economical.
Insecticides are the only tool for pest management that is reliable for emergency
action when insect pest populations approach or exceed the economic threshold. A
major technique such as the use of pesticides can be the very heart and core of
integrated systems. Chemical pesticides will continue to be essential in the pest
management programmes.
There are many pest problems for which the use of chemicals provides the only
acceptable solution. Contrary to the thinking of some people, the use of pesticides for
pest control is not an ecological sin. When their use made on sound ecological
principles, chemical pesticides provide dependable and valuable tools for the biologist.
Their use is indispensable to modern society.
Storing and usage of insecticides
1. The labeled insecticide bottles should be stored in a cool, dry room under lock and key so
that it is not accessible to children.
2. Before preparation of spray fluid read the information on the label and mix the
recommended dosage of insecticides with water.
3. Under no circumstances should the insecticide spray fluid be mixed with hands.
4. Care should be taken to avoid spilling of spray fluid during its preparation or while
pouring it into sprayer.
5. proper clothes and gloves should be worn while spraying the insecticides. Make sure
that no part of the body is exposed to insecticide.
6. Insecticides should not be sprayed or dusted against the wind.
7. Eating, smoking beedi, cigarettes and chewing tobacco should be avoided while spraying
insecticides
8. Regular inspection of spraying equipment and repairs if any should be carried out.
Sprayer nozzles should not blown with mouth.
9. Neither cleaning the sprayer nor throwing the left over sprayfluid should be done in
ponds or canals or it will contaminate the water.
10. Destroy the empty insecticide bottles immediately or bury in the ground.
11. Take a clean bath immediately after spraying to avoid pesticide residues.
12. Inform the farmers near the sprayed field to prevent their cattle entering the field.
Techniques in the effective use of pesticides:
1. Hand sprayer should be used in the early stage of the crop to avoid wastage of sprayfluid
whereas power sprayer should be used during the later stages when the crop canopy is
more.
2. Sucking insects like thrips and mites suck sap from lower leaf surface in crops like chilli,
cotton, vegetables, etc., and to control them contact insecticides should be sprayed by
directing the nozzle such that the undersurface of the leaves is fully covered with
sprayfluid.
3. Care should be taken such that the sprayfluid drops cover both the surfaces of leaves and
on insects attacking flowers and fruits in bushy plants. selection of appropriate nozzle is
very important.
4. Uniform coverage of the crop and wide area coverage with the spray fluid depends on the
selection of the nozzle.
5. In crops with narrow leaves sandovit or Teepol should be mixed in the sprayfluid so that
it adheres to the leaves.
6. To control pupal stages of insects in the soil, dusts like carbaryl should be mixed in the
soil.
7. two types of insecticides should not be mixed and sprayed. chemical reactions may occur
in the mixture and it becomes ineffective. In this regard, follow the advice of the experts
in the field of agriculture.
8. In order to increase the utilization efficacy of the insecticide it should be sprayed as far
as possible in the evening when the stomata will be open.
9. Spraying in the evening will be more effective on nocturnal insects while those sprayed
in the afternoon lose efficacy in the form of vapors.
10. Avoid contact of sprayfluid with body by wearing full clothing, mask, gloves and
eyeglasses.
11. Water added to insecticide should be clean, free of mud, rotten leaves and salt.
12. Farmers should always buy the insecticides from licensed stores only.
Different Classifications of Insecticides
Insecticides are classified in several ways taking into consideration their origin, mode of
entry, mode of action and the chemical nature of the toxicant.
1. BASED ON TOXICITY
2. BASED ON MODE OF ENTRY
3. BASED ON MODE OF ACTION
4. BASED ON CHEMICAL NATURE
1.BASED ON TOXICITY :
The chemical which can make changes in pest life cycle that chemical called poison. it is
measured as L.D. . The Value of L.D.50 for a substance is the dose required to kill half
50
members of a tested population after a specified test. These are two types
I.
(a) L.D. 50 ORAL : by mouth
(b) L.D. 50 Dermal : by contact
II. when quantity along with the dose is also preferred as two types
(a) ACUTE TOXICITY: Acute toxicity describes the adverse effects of a substance
that result either from a single exposure or from multiple exposures in a short
period of time. To be described as acute toxicity.
(b) CHRONIC TOXICITY: Chronic toxicity is the development of adverse effects
as the result of long term exposure to a toxicant or other stressor.
Classification Symbol Oral LD DermalLD
50 50
Extremely toxic Skull & Poison 1-50 1-200
Red
Highly toxic Poison 51-500 201-2000
Yellow
Moderately toxic Danger 501-5000 2001-20,000
Blue
Less toxic Caution more than 5000 more than 20,000
Green
II.Based on the mode of entry
A. Contact poisons: These insecticides are capable of gaining entry into the insect
body either through spiracles and trachea or through the cuticle itself. Hence, these
poisons can kill the insects by mere coming in contact with the body of the insects.
Eg. DDT and HCH.
B. Stomach poisons: The insecticides applied on the leaves and other parts of plants
when ingested act on the digestive system of the insect and bring aboutthe kill of the
insect. Eg: Calcium arsenate, lead arsenate.
C. Fumigants: A fumigant is a chemical substance which is volatile at ordinary
temperatures and sufficiently toxic to the insects. Fumigation is the process of
subjecting the infested material to the toxic fumes or vapours of chemicals or gases
which have insecticidal properties. Chemical used in the fumigant and a reasonably
airtight container or room is known as fumigation chamber or “Fumigatorium”.
Fumigants mostly gain entry into the body of the insect through spiracles in the
trachea. Ex. Aluminium phosphide, Carbon disulphide, EDCT (Ethylene Dichloride
Carbon Tetrachloride), EDB( Ethylene dibromide) and S
O2.
III.Based on mode of action:
A. Physical poisons: Bring about the kill of insects by exerting a physical effect. Eg: Heavy
oils, tar oils etc. which cause death by asphyxiation. Inert dusts effect loss of body moisture
by their abrasiveness as in aluminium oxide or absorb moisture from the body as in charcoal.
b. Protoplasmic poisons: A toxicant responsible for precipitation of protein especially
destruction of cellular protoplasm of midgut epithelium.
Eg. Arsenical compounds.
c.Respiratory poisons: Chemicals which block cellular respiration as in hydrogen cyanide
(HCN), carbon monoxide etc.
d. Nerve poisons: Chemicals which block Acetyl cholinesterase(AChE) and effect the nervous
system. Eg. Organophosphorous, carbamates.
IV.Based on the Chemical nature
a.Inorganic insecticides: comprise compounds of mineral origin and elemental sulphur. This
group includes arsenate and fluorine compounds as insecticides. Sulphur as acaricides and zinc
phosphide as rodenticides.
b.Organic Insecticides:
1. Insecticides of animal origin: Nereistoxin isolated from marine
annelids, fish oil rosin soap from fishes etc.
2. Plant Origin insecticides or Botanical
insecticides:Nicotinoids, pyrethroids, Rotenoids etc.
3. Synthetic organic insecticides: Organochlorines ,
Organophosphorous, Carbamate insecticides etc.,
4. Hydrocarbon oils etc.
Insecticides of plant origin
The insecticides of plant origin extracted from seeds, flowers, leaves, stem and roots, are
termed as botanical insecticides. Insecticides of plant origin unlike synthetic organic insecticides
are safer to use but since they are expensive and lack residual toxicity, their use has been limited
in the country.
1. Neem (Azadirachta indica)
It posses medicinal, insecticidal, insect repellent, antifeedant, growth regulatory,
nematicidal and antifungal properties. Neem seed extract and oil contains a number of
components such as Azadirachtin, salannin, nimbin, epinimbin nimbidin that gives insecticidal,
insect repellent, ovicidal, Antifeedant and growth regulator characters. Azadiractitin disrupts
.
moulting by antagonizing the insect hormone ecdysone
Dried powder of neem leaves are used against stored grain insect pests. Leaf extracts
showed insecticidal property against, Plutella xylostella, Aproaerema modicella; Spodoptera
litura etc.
2. Nicotine:
Nicotine is found in the leaves of Nicotiana tabacum and N.rusticafrom 2% to 14%.
Nicotine worked as a contact insecticide with marked fumigant action in the control of sucking
insect’s viz., aphids, thrips, psyllids, leafminers and jassids. It affects the ganglian blocking
conduction at higher levels.
3. Pyrethrum: It is extracted from dried flower heads of Chrysanthemum cinerariaefolium
(Asteraceae). The actual chemical ingredients having insecticidal action are identified as five
esters. They are: Pyrethrin I, Pyrethrin II, cinerins-I and cinerin-II and Jasmoline, which are
predominately found in achenes of flowers from 0.7 to 3 %. It act as a contact insecticide.The
esters are derived from the,Two acids – Chrysanthemic acid and Pyrethric acid Three alcohols
– Pyretholone, Cinerolone and Jasmolone
Active principles/Esters
Pyrethrin I = Pyrethrolone + Chrysanthemc acid
Pyrethrin II = Pyrethrolone + Pyrethric acid
Cinerin I = Cynerolone + Chrysanthemc acid
Cinerin II = Cynerolone + Pyrethric acid
Jasmolin II = Jasmolone + Pyrethric acid
4. Rotenone:
It is extracted from the roots of Derris and Lonchocarupus plants. Insects poisoned
with rotenone show a steady decline in oxygen consumption followed by paralysis and deaths.
5. Sabadilla :
Sabadilla is derived from the seeds of Schoenocaulon officinale. Sabadilla is having the
cevadine and veratridine alkaloids and they gives the chemical properties.
6. Tehprosine :
Tehprosia vogelli (leafs and seeds )
Tehprosia toxicaria ( roots )
Tehprosia macropoda ( stem )
7. Ryania:
Ryania is extracted from the stem of Ryania speciosa, The most active compound in
ryania is the alkaloid ryanodine, which constitutes approximately 0.2% of the dry weight of stem
wood.
1. Organochlorines or Chlorinated Hydrocarbons Ex: DDT, BHC
The plant protection in India owes its growth to the chemicals under this group which
have revolutionized the control of pests. The organochlorines are stomach and contact
insecticide and high insecticidal efficacy, long residual action, wide range of insect
susceptibility, cheapness per unit area and available in different formulations. Highly purified
product containing 99% of gamma isomer of HCH is known as lindane. It has been extensively
used as soil insecticide. Now a day’s DDT is not used for control of pests.
2. CYCLODINES :
Due to the outstanding characteristic of the cyclodienes is their longer stability in the body,
the insecticides were not used but only endosulfan is used for the control of pest. Endosulfan is
poisonous to honeybees and natural enemies but not to fishes at recommended dose.
Ex: Chlordine , Heptachlor , Aldrine , Diacridine , Endosulfan
3. Organophosphates:
Organophosphate came to limelight during Second World War. Organophosphate
insecticides have two most important properties such as higher potency and low residual life.
The organoposphates are stomach, contact and systemic insecticides. Organophosphates (OPs)
inhibit the cholinesterase (Ch E) enzyme leading to blockage of synaptic transmission of nerve
impulses and finally death.
Ex: Phosphamidan ,Chloripyriphos, Dimethoate.
4. CARBAMATES :
All carbamates are derivatives of carbamic acid and Dithio carbamic acid. Carbamtes also act
as a stomach, contact and systemic insecticides. Carbamates are divided into three groups.
(a).Heterocyclic carbamates : Ex: isolan , pyrolan
(b).Phenyl carbamates : Ex: carbaryl , propoxur , carbofuran
(c). oxime carbamates : Ex : aldicarb , methomyl , thiodicarb
5. Synthetic pyrethroids:
Synthetic pyrethroids have got the properties of plant derivative pyrethrum as
insecticides but are considerably more stable in light and air. Allethrin was first synthetic
analogue of pyrethroids was discovered by Green and Laforz in the year 1949. Later, different
pyrithroids are evolved to control of insects. They act on tiny channel through which sodium is
pumped to cause excitation of neurons and prevent the sodium channels from closing,
resulting in continual nerve trans mission , tremors and eventually death.
Ex: Permethrin, Allethrin, Cismethrin, Resmethrin, Deltamethrin, Cypermethrin and
Fenvalerate
NOVEL INSECTICIDES
6. Neonicotinoids
They represent a novel and distinct chemical class of insecticides with remarkable chemical and
biological properties. Similar to nicotines in activity partially to structure. Neonicotinoids
interact with acetyl choline binding site of nicotinic Ach receptor which cause excitation and
eventually paralysis leading to death of insects. These are selective and safe to non target
organisms.
Ex : Imidacloprid - Mango hoppers
Acetamiprid - White fly
Thiacloprid - Sucking pest like white fly and aphids
7. Juvenile Hormone (JH)Mimics
They do not allow Metamorphosis to take place there by forcing larva to continue as a
larva. In case of mosquitoes metamorphosis is not take place there by forcing larva to continue as
a larva. Ex: Juvabione, Methoprene, Hydroprene and Kinoprene
8. Anti JH orJH Agonists or Precocenes:
Anti-juvenile hormones found in plants that induce reversible precocious
metamorphosis and sterilization in insects by suppressing the function of the corpora allata
gland. Ex: Fenoxycarb and Pyriproxyfen
9. Phenyl pyrazoles: Ex: Fipronil
GABA receptors is the target site for fipronil. Blockage of GABA gated chloride
channel reduces neuronal inhibition which leads to hyper exitation of the central nervous
system, convulsions and death of an target pest.Used as a foliar application against stem borer,
leaf miner, hoppers, root worm and mites
Formulations: 0.3 G, 5 SC
10. Spinosyns Ex: Spinosad
The extract of the fermentation broth that contains spinosad is produced by the
microorganism, Saccharopolyspora spinosa. The primary components are spinosyn A and
spinosyn D.
Spinosad kills insects by causing rapid excitation by activation of nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors of the insect nervous system, leading to involuntary muscle
contractions, prostration with tremors, and paralysis. It also effects GABA receptor
functioning. Spinosad is a contact and stomach poison with some translaminar movement in
leaf tissue.
Formulations: 45 SC, 2.5 WSC
11. Avermectins:
These are produced by the soil microorganism Streptomyces avermitilis. Avermectins
activate the GABA gated chloride channel, causing an inhibitory effect, which, when
excessive, results in the insect’s death. This channel normally blocks reactions in some nerves,
preventing excess stimulation of CNS.
Ex: Emamectin benzoate and abamectin are the two major compounds in this
group.These are effective against tobacco hornworm, diamondback moth, tobacco budworm,
serpentine leaf miner and less potent against certain Homoptera (aphids) and Lepidoptera.
12. Oxadiazines : Ex: Indoxacarb
The active ingredient indoxacarb works by inhibiting sodium ion entry into nerve cells,
resulting in paralysis and death of targeted pests.
Formulations: SC 14.5, WDG 30
13.Thio-Urea Derivatives: Ex: Diafenthiuron
Diafenthiuron is new types of thiourea derivative which acts specially on sucking pests
such as mites, whiteflies and aphids. Diafenthiuron is photochemically converted within a few
hours in sunlight to its carbodimiide derivative which is much more powerful
acaricide/insecticide than diafenthiuron. It is a inhibitor of oxidative phosphorylation, via
distruption of ATP formation (inhibitor of ATP synthase).
It acts as Acaricide cum-insecticide as a foliar sprays against mites, sucking pests,
lepidopteran insect pests.
14. Pyridine Azomethines: Ex: Pymetrozine
Pymetrozine is a new insecticide highly active and specific against sucking insect pests.
Pymetrozine is the only representative of the pyridine azomethine. When the insertion of the
stylets of sucking insects into the pymetrozine treated plant tissues, stylets are almost
immediately blocked. The sucking insects die by starvation a few days later (feeding
depressant)
15. Di – Acyl Hydrazones : Ex: Tebufenazyde
They inhibit the moulting process in insects and finally lead to death of the insect.
16. Ketoenols: Ex: Spiromesifen
Ketoenols act as insecticide and acaricide. Their mode of action is to inhibit lipogenesis
in treated insects, resulting in decreased lipid contents, growth inhibition of younger insects, and
reduced ability of adult insects to reproduce. it also strongly affects fecundity of mite (and
whitefly adults by transovariole effects).
NEMATICIDES:
A nematicide is a type of chemical pesticide used to kill plant-parasitic
nematodes. Nematicides have tended to be broad-spectrum toxicants possessing high volatility or
other properties promoting migration through the soil.
Ex: 1.Aldicarb:
Aldicarb is a carbamate insecticide which is the active substance in the pesticide Temik.
It is effective against thrips, aphids, spider mites, lygus, fleahoppers, and leafminers, but is
primarily used as a nematicide. Aldicarb is a cholinesterase inhibitor which prevents the
breakdown of acetylcholine in the synapse.
2. Carbofuran :
Carbofuran is one of the most toxic carbamate pesticides. It is marketed under the trade
names Furadan, it woks on sucking pest, Nemoticides and Midge.
Rodenticides :
Rodenticides are pesticides that kill rodents. Rodents include not only rats and mice, but
also squirrels, woodchucks, chipmunks, porcupines, nutria, and beavers. Although rodents play
important roles in nature, they may sometimes require control. these are three (3) types
1. Acute poison Ex: zinc phosphide ,aluminumphosphide
2. Anti coagulants Ex: bromadialone
3. Fumigants Ex: methyl bromide
1. Zinc phosphide:
This chemical is in the form of black powder and has a kind of smell . pre-baiting must
be done . first u have to Taunt Rats ( 7-8) days after that hominy ( 96 cups ) take 2 cups of
chemical and mix it then use it as poison bait .
2. Aluminumphosphade :
It should be closed in a burros with Rats and then the phasphin gas release from it . this
gas kills the Rats . it is available in the name of celphos
3. Bromadiolone :
This can be used as a poison bait . it can kills upto 90% of Rats it is available in the
market like Roboncake . it should be 100 grm weight and 6 pieces . after using this with in 4-7
days the Rats will die .
Acaricides :
The chemicals can kills the mites are known as Acaricides .
Ex: Sulphur - Saltaf , Thiovit
Dicofol - kelthane – this chemical formula looks like D.D.T. D.D.T. contains
‘H’ part and ‘OH’ that’s why Dicofol kills the mite. This is not
Harmful to honey bees.
Insect Antifeedants
Antifeedant is a chemical that inhibits feeding but does not kill the insect
directly; the insect often may remain on the treated plant material and possibly may die
of starvation. These are also caused as “Feeding deterrents”
Ex: Triazines - 4 acetanilyde - red headed catter pillar
Organotin (Brestan)- Triphenyltins - potato rhizome weevil
Carbamate (Aprocarb ) - cotton weevil
Advantages of Antifeedants:
1. Antifeedants affect only the phytophagous insects and so do not harm the beneficial
parasitoids, predators and pollinators.
2. As the pest is not immediately killed by antifeedent, its parasites and predators continue
to feed on it, thrive, and keep it under control.
3. Antifeedants produce no phytotoxicity (or) pollution.
Disadvantages of Antifeedants:
1. Only the chewing type of insects is affected by antifeedants, the sucking pests remain
unaffected.
2. New growths of plant are not protected.
Insect Attractants
Chemicals that cause insects to make oriented movements towards their source are
called insect attractants. They influence both gustatory (taste) and olfactory (smell) receptors
(or) sensilla.
Ex: Geraniol and Eugenol (1:1) is used to attract Japanese beetle
Methyl Eugenol will attract the male fruit fly and it is used as poison bait
Sex pheromones
A Sex pheromone released by one sex only triggers off a series of behaviour patterns in
the other sex of the same species and thus facilitates mating. The male insects respond to the
odorous chemical released by the female. In certain species of insects the males are known to
produce the sex pheromone which attracts the females. Ex: In the cotton boll weevil
Anthonomus grandis
The following sex pheromones have been full filled.
1. Silkworms trans - 10 - cis – 12 – decadaienol
2. Gypsymoth 10 acetoxy - cis - 7 - hexadecinol
Sex pheromones in insect pest management
1) Monitoring of insect pests: Traps baited with synthetic sex pheromones is useful in
estimating population and detecting early stages of pests. Four pheromone traps per
acre is recommended.
2) Mass-trapping: (Male annihilation technique): Large number of pheromones
baited traps can be used in the fields to capture male moths of newly emerged and
reduce the number of males for mating.
3) Control of pest by mating disruption: By permeating the atmosphere with
higher concentration of the pheromone the opposite sex is rendered confused and
unable to locate their mates.
Formulations of Insecticides
It is essential that the toxicant must be amenable to application in an effective manner so
as to come into direct contact with the pest or leaf and uniform and persistent deposit upon the
plant surface. Since very small quality of toxicant is required to be distributed over a large area,
insecticides are formulated in a form suitable for use as a spray, dust or fumigant. Formulation is
the processing of a compound by such methods that will improve its properties of storage,
handling, application, effectiveness and safety to the applicator and environment and
profitability. It is the final physical condition in which insecticide is sold.
A single insecticide is often sold in several different formulations. Following are the
different formulations of insecticides.
1.Dusts (D): These are ready to use insecticides in powder form. In a dust formulation the
toxicant is diluted either by mixing with or by impregnation on a suitable finely divided carrier
which may be an organic flour or pulverized mineral like lime, gypsum, talc etc., or clay like
attapulgite bentonite etc.The toxicant in a dust formulation ranges from 0.15 to 25% and the
particle size in dust formulations is less than 100 microns and with the decrease in particle size
the toxicity of the formulation increases. Dusts are easy to apply, less labour is required and
water is not necessary. However if wind is there, loss of chemical occurs due to drift hence
dusting should be done in calm weather and also in the early morning hours when the plant is
wet with dew.
Eg. HCH 10% dust; Endosulfan 4% D.
2. Granules or Pelleted insecticides(G): These are also ready to use granular or pelleted forms of
insecticides. In this formulation the particle is composed of a base such as an inert material
impregnated or fused with the toxicant which released from the formulation in its intact form or
as it disintegrates giving controlled release. The particle size ranges from 0.25 to 2.38 mm, or
250 to 1250 microns and contains 1 to 10% concentration of the toxicant. The granules are
applied in water or whorls of plants or in soil. Action may be by vapour or systemic. In
application of granules there is very little drift and no undue lose of chemical. Undesirable
contamination is prevented. Residue problem is less since granules do not adhere to plant
surface. Release of toxicant is achieved over a long period. Easy for application as water is not
required for application. Less harmful for natural enemies.
Eg: Carbofuran 3G, Phorate10 G, Cartap hydrochloride 4G
3. Wettable Powders (WP): It is a powder formulation which is to be diluted with water and
applied. It yields a stable suspension with water. The active ingredient (toxicant) ranges from 15
to 95%. It is formulated by blending the toxicant with a diluent such as attapulgite, a surface
active agent and an auxiliary material. Sometimes stickers are added to improve retention on
plant surface. Loss of chemical due to run off may be there and water is required for application.
Eg: Carbaryl 50%WP, Thiodicarb 75% WP
4. Suspension Concentrate (SC): Active ingredient is absorbed on to a filler which is then
suspended in a liquid matrix (water).It is not dusty and easier to disperse in water. Eg:
Imidacloprid 50 SC
5. Emulsifiable Concentrates (EC): Here the formulation contains the toxicant, a solvent for
the toxicant and an emulsifying agent. It is a clear solution and it yields an emulsion of oil-in
water type, when diluted with water. The active ingredient (toxicant) ranges from 2.5 to 100
%.When sprayed the solvent evaporates quickly leaving a deposit of toxicant from which water
also evaporates. The emulsifying agents are alkaline soaps, organic amines alginates,
Carbohydrates, gums, lipids, proteins etc. Eg: Endosulfan 35EC, Profenophos 50EC
6. Concentrated insecticide liquids: The technical grade of the toxicant at highly
concentrated level is dissolved in non-volatile solvents. Emulsifier is not added. Generally
applied from high altitudes in extremely fine droplets without being diluted with water at ultra
volume rates. There is greater residual toxicity and less loss through evaporation. Active
ingredient ranges from 80-100%
Eg: Malathion, Bifenthrin,Fenitrothion.
7. Insecticide aerosels: The toxicant is suspended as minute particles 0.1 to 30 microns in air as
fog or mist. The toxicant is dissolved in a liquified gas and if released through a small hole
causes the toxicant particles to float in air with rapid evaporation of the released gas. Eg:
Allethrin
8. Fumigants: A chemical compound which is volatile at ordinary temperature and
sufficiently toxic is known as fumigant. Most fumigants are liquids held in cans or tanks and
quite often they are mixtures of two or more gases. Advantage of using fumigant is that the
places not easily accessible to other chemicals can be easily reached due to penetration and
dispersal effect of the gas.
Eg; Aluminium phosphide
COMBINATION OF INSECTICIDES
When two chemicals are brought together in a single spray mixture, due to reaction, a
compound differing from either parent may be formed. Knowledge of the effects of such
compounds on the plants when applied is essential to avoid improper use.
The different types of incompatibility are:
i) Chemical incompatibility: Different compounds are formed due to reaction of various
chemicals as in synthetic organic compounds with an alkaline material which causes injury to
plants.
ii) Phytotoxic incompatibility: The component parts though themselves are not injurious to
the plants and do not show any chemical reaction when mixed, the mixture causes injury to
plants.
iii) Physical incompatibility: The chemicals change their physical form to one that is unstable
and hazardous for application.
Insecticide Combinations:
Some of the important insecticide combinations are:
Name of pesticides Trade name Recommended for pest
1 Chloripyriphos 50% Noorel –D 505 Leaf miner , fruit borer
cypermethrin 5% (2ml/l)
2 Profenophos 40 % + Palithrin Fruit borer, sucking pest
(300-400ml/l)
cypermethrin 5%
3 Triazophos 35% + spark White fly and leaf miner
(300-400ml/l)
Deltamethrin 1%+
