PROFFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION & RURAL DEVELOPMENT
DA-291
1
PROFFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION & RURAL DEVELOPMENT
DA-291
Compilation & revised By
Dr. E. Srinivas
Professor - Agricultural Extension
Dr. M. Sreenivasulu
Pr. Scientist & Coordinator (Electronic wing-PJTSAU)
Miss. J. Spondana
Asst. Professor (Extn)
2
CONTENTS
1 Education - Meaning, formal, informal and non-formal education and
difference between the formal and non-formal education
2 Extension education-Meaning, definition, concepts, principles and
importance.
3 Agricultural Extension - Meaning and Scope
4 Extension teaching methods- meaning, classification, merits and demerits of
each extension teaching methods
5 Agricultural information materials- Advantages, production, types – leaflets,
folder, pamphlet, circular letter, newsletter, bulletin, new story wall
newspaper
6 Instructional aids -Meaning, objective, classification.
7 Extension programme planning-Meaning of planning, programme, project,
calendar of work, plan of work, principals of programme planning and steps
in programme planning development process.
8 Evaluation -Meaning, elements, degrees and importance of evaluation in
extension.
9 Sociology & rural sociology-Importance of rural sociology in extension
education, characteristics of rural society.
Differences between rural & urban community.
10 Rural development - Meaning, objective and problems
11 Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA)- Meaning, salient features, principals
and techniques.
12 Leadership-Meaning, classification, features, selection and training.
13 Developmental programmes-Pre-independence & post-independence.
14 Community development
15 Panchayath raj system
16 Evolution of Mandal system in Andhra Pradesh
17 Extension reforms -ATMA, SREP, Market led extension.
3
PRACTICAL
1 Village visit- Study on village development problems and preparation of
programme planning by using nine steps
2 Visit to gram panchayat- Study on activities of Grampachayat
3 Visit to Manadalaparishat- Study the activities of Mandalaparishat
4 Visit to Zillaparishat- Study the activities of Zillaparishat
5 Leaflet, Folder, News stories preparation
6 Village visit- To study the characteristics of village
7 Village visit – To teach any agricultural technology by using various
extension teaching methods
8 Village visit- Identification of local leaders
9 Preparation of record on above topics & submission
4
HAPTER - I
EDUCATION
(Education meaning of formal, informal and non formal education
and difference between the Formal and non-formal education)
Education meaning.
Education is the process of bringing desirable change in to the behavior of human being.
Education is the process of teaching to develop the knowledge, skill, or character of the student. -
Webster
Education is the cheapest, most rapid and most reliable path to economic advancement under present
conditions, - Rodney Stark
Education is the process of developing capability of the individual so that they can adequately
response to their situation
Formal education:
Formal education refers to the hierarchically structured education system running from the
kindergarten through the university, including institutions of technical and professional education and
training.
Informal education:
Informal education is life long process in which portions assures knowledge, skill, attitude and
insight from daily experiences and exposure to the endearment at home.
✓ Incidental and spontaneous
✓ Not-pre-planned
✓ Not imparted by any specialized agency
✓ No prescribed time-table or curriculum
✓ May be negative also
Non-Formal Education
It is organized and systematic education activity carried on outside the frame work of the
formal system to provide selected type of learning to the particular group of population.
✓ Derived from the expression ‘formal education.
✓ Outside the realm interest of formal education.
✓ Conscious and deliberate.
✓ To be organized for a homogeneous group.
✓ Serving the need of the identified group.
5
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FORMAL AND NONFORMAL EDUCATION
S. No. Formal education Non formal education
1 Education concerned with growth of Adults and youth actual life situations
children and youth preparing them for
future
2 Attendance is compulsory Participation is voluntary
3 Learners are relatively more Relatively more heterogeneous in terms of
homogenous in terms of their age, educational qualification,
their age, and grasping power is more experience, interests, living conditions and
learning, majority are illiterates hence
suitable teaching methods are required
4 Learners do not generally Learners generally have preconceived ideas
have any preconceived and notions because of their past experiences
ideas hence teaching is easy teaching is challenge or difficult
5 Curriculum fixed and has pre decided No fixed curriculum and it is flexible to meet
students should adopt themselves the diverse needs and demand of farmers
to the curriculum offered
6 Teaching is more formal with class Is more informal without any fixed venue and
rooms, prescribed text books, and text books, timings and examinations, it is
examinations specific and problem oriented
7 Mode of instruction is vertical- Horizontal shared learning between teacher
from teacher to student. more and learner
instructive in nature
8 Method of learning starts with theory Starts with practical and goes on to theory
followed by practical learning
9 Teacher is older and experienced May be younger and inexperienced than the
than the learners. learners
10 More formal in the form of marks, More informal evaluation
grades etc
11 It is time bound programme Free from regimentation, participatory in
nature
6
CHAPTER - II
EXTENSION EDUCATION
(Meaning, definition, concepts, principles & importance)
Introduction.
Any country i.e., developed, developing try to develop in all sectors, hence to
develop desirable change is essential but this change should be correct and in right
direction.
This change should generate the scientific and technical knowledge as well as
practicable, the village development programs must be tailored by considering scientific,
technical knowledge and practicable technology.
Scientific Knowledge
Technical Knowledge
Practicable Technology
Village development programme
Fig.No.1 Village Development Programme Model
This method is implemented by land grand college of USA for the first time later all most all
the universities were adopted the same in India.
Extension Education- Meaning:
The word Extension is derived from the Latin roots ‘Ex’ meaning ‘out’ and ‘tensio’
meaning ‘stretching’. Thus, the term extension education means the type of education which is
stretched out into the villages and fields beyond the limits of schools and colleges to which formal
type of education is normally confined. In other words, the word ‘extension’ used in this context
signifies an OUT OF SCHOOL system of education.
EXTENSION
EX (Latin word) Tensio
(OUT) (Stretching)
Fig.No.2- Extension Word
7
Definition.
Extension education is the process of teaching rural people how to live better by learning
ways that improve their farm, home and community institutions
The basic concept of Extension is that it is education. the education is the production of desirable
changes in human behavior.
Extension is providing education. The three kinds of behavioral changes produced through
extension education are illustrated below:
1. Change in knowledge
Eg: Extension worker can improve knowledge of paddy farmers on WTO through trainings.
Eg: Knowledge of rural women on pesticide hazards can be improved by giving trainings
2. Change in skills (Mental and physical).
a) Mental skills: Application of knowledge in solving the problems of life i.e ability of the
person to work out solutions and ways to meet new problems.
Eg: Calculation of seed rates, fertilizer dosages, pesticide dosages etc.
b) Physical skills: Ability of a person to do any work physically
Eg: Skills of women farmers on mushroom cultivation can be improved by demonstrations.
Eg: Skills of farmers on poison bait preparation for Spodoptera management can be
improved by demonstrations.
c) Change in attitude:
Eg: Attitude of farmers can be changed from paddy cultivation to flower cultivation
through exposure visits
Eg: Negative attitude of women farmers towards mushroom consumption can be
changed by explaining nutritional importance to them.
Change in attitude is most important one usually neglected. Extension worker may
improve knowledge and skills of farmers in SRI method of paddy cultivation but unless the
attitude of farmers is made positive towards SRI, implementation does not happen.
Example for KAS change in a single programme. Rodent Management
2. THE CONCEPT OF THE EXTENSION EDUCATIONAL PROCESS
The earlier concept of education aiming at improvement in Knowledge, Attitude, Skills
happens step wise in a cyclic manner which is termed as Extension Education Process.
The concept of Extension Education Process was developed by Dr. J. Paul Leagans.
According to him, extension education takes place as a process, the education starts with study of
present situation and identification of problems based on the problems identified, solutions are found
out and objectives are formulated. In the third phase, plan of work is taught on how to attain the
objectives, the entire process is evaluated and tested whether formulated objectives are attained or not
8
and in the final stage reconsideration about the unattained objectives and unaddressed problems and
reasons for not attained.
Extension works undertaken in villages follows the same path.
Teaching plan of work-III
Objective & Evaluation-IV
solutions-II
Situation & Problems-I Reconsideration-V
Fig 3: Extension education process
The first phase is analysis of the situation. This phase requires a large amount of facts about
situation, interests, education, needs, their social customs, habits and folkways, type of
farming, markets size of farms, cropping systems housing, community services and
communications.
The second phase is deciding upon objectives. It is necessary to distinguish between general
objectives from the specific objectives, the planning process must enable the people to select a
limited number of problems and to state their objectives clearly. The solutions to be offered
must give satisfaction. objectives should express the behavioral changes in people as well as
the economic or social outcomes which are desired.
The third phase is teaching. This involves choosing the content or what is to be taught and
methods and techniques of teaching we must use from six to nine different methods of teaching
to stimulate learning.
The fourth phase is evaluation of the teaching. This should determine to what extent
objectives have been reached. This will also be a test of how accurately and clearly the
objectives have been stated. The process of evaluation may be simple and informal or it may be
formal and very complex.
The fifth phase is reconsideration:
After evaluation has taken place. This step consists of a review of previous
efforts and results which reveal a new situation. If this new situation shows the need for further
work, then the whole process may begin again, with new or modified objectives hence this
process is continuous.
The concept of salesmanship
Extension education sometimes compared to commercial salesmanship. It is pointed out that the
extension worker is primarily engaged in the “selling” of ideas. The methods applied by the sales man
in business the same methods give special benefits in extension education.
9
Objectives of extension.
The basic objective of extension is people’s development.
To assist the people to discover and analyse the problems, felt and unfelt needs
To develop the relationship among people and help them in organisations of groups to solve their
problems
To disseminate information based on research or practical experience, in such a manner that the
people would accept it and put in to actual practice.
To keep the research workers informed of the people’s problem from time to time so that they may
offer solutions based on necessary research.
The basic ambitions of extension can be classified as follows
1.Materail: Enhancement in production and income.
2.Related to education: Change in outlook of people or development of individuals.
3.Social & cultural: Development of community
Principles of extension
1. Every individual has extraordinary importance in democracy
2. The house is the basic unit of civilization
3. Primarily family has to be trained in human society
4. The base of any civilization is de pends on the relationship between people and nation
The aim of extension to help the citizens to reach highest standard of living to reach the
highest standard of living the people must be educated, mould as responsible citizens. Extension
worker deliver goods by keeping in mind person, home, family & environment.
WHY EXTENSION Or IMPORTANCE OF EXTENSION
In business to get appropriate profit we can’t adopt the old methods and procedures in the
same way the economic develop of any country depends on introduction and adoption of new methods
and procedures in consideration to citizens, groups, and trends in society. This change is very much
essential in villages where 80 per cent of rural people living villages, so the rural people have adopt
the new technologies which are developed by the research institutes, and there is necessity to transfer
the rural problems to research institutes for scientific solution, further time may not be sufficient to
scientists to make understand the rural people and thousands farmers unable to bring the problems to
research institutes resulting lot of rural problems ending without solutions. To bridge this gap the
extension was introduced i.e. to give proper research-based solutions to rural people and to transfer the
researchable rural issues to research institutes.
Research institutes
Rural people Extension
Fig-4: Agricultural extension
10
CHAPTER – III
AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION
(Meaning & scope)
Introduction
For the first time in America, Agricultural extension is used in agriculture and home science,
after the agricultural programs started and it was extended to the field of fish culture in Norway and
Sweden. In agricultural extension programs, the scope of extension depends on needs of population
working units / working officer and also on the situation of the country etc.
In developing country, extension has a vital role and wide scope in educating the rural people in
agriculture, animal husbandry, cooperative societies, gram panchayaths, social education, industries,
health, woman & child welfare and fisheries.
Agricultural extension meaning.
Agricultural extension is a service to the formers on use of improved varieties, latest
agricultural developments, improved production technology to reap higher yields and to bring desirable
change in social, economic behavior.
Scope of agricultural extension.
The following nine areas of programme emphasis and indicate the scope of
agricultural extension work.
1. Efficiency in agricultural production.
2. Efficiency in marketing, distribution and utilization.
3. Conservation, development and use of natural resources.
4. Management on the farm and home.
5. Family living.
6. Youth development.
7. Leadership development.
8. Community development.
9. Public affairs.
11
CHAPTER – IV
EXTENSION TEACHING METHODS
(Meaning, classification, merits & demerits)
Extension teaching methods are tools to full fill their needs themselves, good teaching methods
are essential for effective learning in education, teacher is base for effective learning, extension
teaching methods are very useful to bring desirable changes in the people hence extension officer or
teacher or professor has to select the suitable teaching method to bring desirable changes in behavior,
knowledge, skills and attitude.
1. There is possibility to learn by people
2. Favorable learning situation will be created by physical and psychological stimulations
Definition:
Extension teaching methods are the devices used to create situations in which communication
can take place between an instructor and learner - Leagans- 1961.
Importance of extension teaching methods.
1.Adoption of special method of teaching where learners can learn by watching, listening and doing.
2. Bringing desirable changes in psychology and physical activity of learners
3. To create attention, interest, desire, conviction, action and satisfaction in teaching and
learning method.
CLASSIFICATION OF TEACHING METHODS
Teaching methods according to use.
a) Individual methods.
Example:
✓ Farm & home visits,
✓ Office visits (RARS.ARS, Agri. Universities, KVKs, Agricultural Office, MRO, etc.)
✓ Letters,
✓ Mails,
✓ Blogs,
✓ Mobile or Telephone calls,
✓ Information dissemination through school teachers, village leaders.
b) Group methods:
Example:
✓ Method demonstrations
✓ Meetings
✓ Group meetings
✓ Group discussions
✓ Learning groups
✓ Common discussions
✓ Unorganized groups
✓ Youth organisations,
✓ Mahila mondals,
✓ Anganwadi centers etc.
12
C) Mass methods:
Example:
✓ Radio
✓ Televisions
✓ News papers
✓ Advertisement posters
✓ Photographs
✓ Mails, letters
✓ Exhibitions
✓ Group songs, dance programmes
✓ Festivals
✓ Libraries.
Low intensity to higher intensity
Mass methods Group methods Individual
methods
Goals
News papers Meetings Field visits Development
families
Radios Method Home visits
demonstrations Change in life style at
Home
Pamphlets Result Office visits
demonstrations/ LDs Enhancement in
Agricultural production
Letters Leadership meetings Personal letters
Assisting in Community
Advertisement Exposure visits Demonstrations Development
papers
Exhibits Other meetings ------
All are the indicators to achieve the goals
II According to form:
a) Written form.
✓ Newspapers
✓ Leaflets
✓ Letters
✓ Pamphlets
✓ Booklets.
✓ Bulletins
b) Spoken form:
✓ Radio.
✓ Method demonstration
✓ Common meetings
✓ Learning groups
✓ Farm & home visits
✓ Mobile calls (Mobile / Telephone Calls)
c) Visual or object type:
✓ Exhibition
✓ Postures, charts (Flexy)
✓ Demonstrations
13
d) Spoken & visual:
✓ Field visits
✓ Result demonstrations
✓ Television
✓ V. logs
✓ Films
✓ You tub
III. According to sound & information.
a) According to sound: Example: Radio.
b) According to picture: Example: Charts, Maps, Graphs
c) Experience according to observation: Example: Exhibitions, Exposure visits
d) Experience by practicing: Example: Dramas, Role play, Models Preparation
The following points to be kept in mind while selecting the teaching methods:
Attitude, level of education, knowledge, situation of family or family background, opinion
of the people on government offices and experience as well as the following reasons also to be
considered.
1. Economic situation. Which includes living style, courage to face the problems, social situation
in village, type of leadership etc.
2. Physical facilities: Location of village, transport facilities, population etc.
3. Social situation: Resistance to change.
4. Past experience: Impact of previous work in village development, i.e., belief of the villagers on
village procedures, villagers’ habits, confidence of villagers with village extension officers,
dependency of villagers on government policies etc.
5. Extension workers or officers: The responsibilities of extension officers they must know the
available resources of village for development, villagers, must be trained in extension teaching
methods, further they must know the suitable extension teaching methods according to
situation.
6. Procedures: To create scientific knowledge among the villager’s selection of suitable extension
methods are essential, skillfully selection of various extension teaching methods in different
stages extension education programme very much required.
TEACHING METHODS - ADVANTAGES AND LIMITETIONS
Individual Methods:
Advantages:
1. Possibility to know the important problems of village
2. Built up strong personal relationship and positive opinion.
3. It create the belief in between extension officer and villagers as results villagers
come forward to implement the programme which was directed by the extension
officers.
5. Implementation of targeted projects are easy as the interested body is elected
6. As per the time and needs material will be provided hence the programme will be
implemented as per the plan.
7. High ratio in between acceptance and assessment.
Limitations
1. Extension officer have to spend more time in village
14
2. To discuss about plans, implementation requires more time hence every day
interaction by extension officer with villagers is limited.
3. This method is expensive.
4. There is possibility of contacting one sector of people and neglecting of others in villages
hence there is chance of missing of targeted group
II. Office calls.
Advantages.
1. Interest will be developed in learning of more subject.
2. Save the time of extension officer as the farmers are coming to office to clarify their issues.
3. Estimation of interest of villagers in extension activities, become easy.
Limitations.
1. There is possibility of non-availability of extension officer at office.
2. Farmers may not be satisfied with the information received from office subordinates in at office
during absence of officer.
3. The methods which are available at office may not possible to implement in day-to-day life at
villages.
Personal letters.
Advantages.
1. Farmers will receive the suggestion through letters to face the problems.
2. Extension officer assistance is possible in extension activities.
Precautions to be taken while writing personal letter:
1. Immediately reply to the letter as agricultural and other extension programmes are time bound.
2. The following points must follow while writing letter.
a) Proper answers must be given to issues raised or requested by the farmers or clints.
b) Answers must be clear, concise and simple language.
c) Answers must be realistic and without any kind of mistakes
d) The conversation in letter must be in amicable
e) The letter must be clearly readable, with good hand writing.
Result demonstrations:
Advantages:
1. Very useful to introduce new methods and habits.
2. Possibility of learning by seeing at different stages.
3. This method is useful to demonstrate the realistic issues or methods or varieties
4. Result demonstration can be adopted in nearby villages to educate, get experience by the Agri.
extension officers or workers
5. There is possibility to identify the local leadership through result demonstration.
Limitations:
1. Time taking, requires consciousness at every stage of demonstration.
2. Expensive
3. Experienced and efficient extension workers are necessary to maintain records of result
demonstration.
4. There possibility of development of ego.
5. If result demonstration failure which leads to lose of respect and confidence on extension
15
Group methods.
Advantages:
1. Possibility of development of objectivity in the villagers.
2. Participants will get satisfaction and happy as there is chance to give
suggestion in implementation of programme.
3. These methods are useful to decide the topics for discussion.
4. Through this method the focus points, leadership personalities, and problems
of group will be identified.
5. There is possibility of group education and activity.
6. There is possibility to bring desirable change in group numbers.
7. As this is group activity which enhances the enthusiasm in group.
Limitations:
1. There may be hurdle to implement the programmes in villages due to parties.
2. Ethnocentric personalities who practicing the traditional methods may disappointed due to
noncooperation from the extension officer
3. There is chance of disputes among the people
General meetings:
Advantages:
1.Useful to bring desirable change in large number of people in limited time
2. All issues or subjects can be discussed
3. Prime necessities can be identified to maintain social relationship.
4. Strengthen the friendship in between the villagers and extension officers or workers
5. It helps in implementation all extension methods.
6.It helps in identification and dissemination open issues.
7. Desirable changes can be brought in habits with low cost.
Limitations:
1. Always availability of suitable place and facilities to organize meetings.
2. Difference of opinion and disputes of the villagers sometimes may become barrier to extension
education.
3. Climate and other obstructions and attractions of villagers may become barrier of meetings
4. Extension worker or officer has to work not only in day time but also in night
5. Abruptly organized meetings may create bore
Method demonstration:
1. This is best extension teaching method to teach the people.
2. The teaching method of method demonstration involves seeing, listening and doing
which creates interest in implementation.
3. Very fast learning of skills.
4. It enhances the belief of extension officers on technology and adoptability as the
teaching involves skills.
5. Simple and common experiments create enthusiasm and make them to adopt by
village leaders.
6. We can bring the desirable changes in habits of villagers with low cost.
7. There is possibility to collect the information on common issues for the benefit of
Villagers.
16
Limitation:
1. This method is only useful to exhibit and implement the skill.
2. Time taking to collect information, material to the extension officers.
3. Need of transport of material to the demonstration site or place.
Lecture.
Advantages.
1. In this teaching method a large amount the topics can be covered in a single class period.
2. Using of this method exclude the using of any equipment or lab.
3. Learning material is not required.
4. Student listening skills developed.
5. Logical arrangement of the material in order to present it orally
6. Help to learn languages
Disadvantages
1. Psychologically this method is acceptable because individuals are not alike. Teacher
delivers the same lecture to both students without recognizing the individual differences.
2. Learning is an active process thus study should encourage to actively participate in the
class room instead of just listening the teacher.
3. Language using in the lecture is above the standard of the students. They are not able get
full advantage of the lecture.
4. Lecture are often forgotten by the students soon after learning it is retained if activities
are experienced.
5. Attention level is not the same while student listening the lecture.
Group discussion.
1.Emphasis on learning instead of teaching.
2.Participation by everyone in the group.
3.Development of democratic way of thinking.
4.Training in reflective thinking.
5.Training in self-expression.
6.Spirit of tolerance is inculcated.
7.Learning made interesting.
Limitations.
1.Discussion method is not appropriate for all the topics.
2.It can be used only to students or participants who have some basic knowledge in the topic.
3.Some of the students may feel shy or reluctant to take part while others may try to
dominate
4.Teacher may lose control over the students or participants and they may end up in quarrel.
Field trips /Field Visits
Advantages.
1. Participants gain first- hand knowledge of improved practices and stimulated action
2.Eminently suited to the “Show me” type of people
3.Percentage of takes in exposure is high
4.Widen the vision of farmers or students
5.Creates group psychology and leadership
6.Has incidental values of entertainment and sight – seeing
Limitations.
1.It is costly
2.Difficult fix up season and time suitable for all
3.Bottlenecks of transport and accommodation at halting places
17
4.Possibility of subordinating educational aspect to the sight seeing aspect
5.Risk of accidents
Mass method.
Advantages
1. Reaches largest number of people at the shortest time possible.
2. People learn through eye and will remember things better if they see them.
3. Television viewing does not demand strain and discipline needed as to read the printed
medium.
4. Messages are presented in a simplest manner.
5. Suitable for creating awareness in people.
Limitations
1. Limited number of broadcast stations.
2. Not within reach of all farmers.
3. Time assigned to agriculture extension is limited.
4. Recommendations may not apply to individual needs.
5. No turning back if not understood.
6. Frequently loses out in competition with entertainment.
7. Requires special techniques
18
CHAPTER-V
AGRICULTURAL INFORMATION MATERIALS
(Advantages, production, typ es, leaflets, folder, pamphlet,
circular letter, newsletter, bulletin, new story & wall newspaper)
The main objective of information material is to send the information hence it must be easily
understandable, simple is very important.
Scientific information blended with technical words, write the content in local language with
simple words to understand by common people, to publish any information must follow some rules.
Example: Bulletins, Journals.
Guidelines to be followed in publication.
Collection of information as per the need of common man arrange the information or content
according to its importance. The selection of important messages depends on the following.
Teaching topic:
Identify the content which includes needs, solutions, interest creation, suitable time, location
specific, use full in day-to-day life.
Nature of readers:
Identify the literacy level, i.e., literate, are illiterate, their problems, interest, and ability to use
the content of information material as per the situation.
Production – Features to be considered:
Agriculturists as farmers are heterogeneous in education, age, farmers are waiting for the
information to enhance the living standards they are hard workers, after the hard work they love to
study the written information, they read the content if it is interesting, understandable otherwise they
skip the study and get the necessary information from the fellow farmers, local leaders, local extension
officers and teachers hence the written information must contain reliable information than the
information received from the local leader, extension officers and teachers.
1.Audience:
While preparing of information materials must be considered the audience - who read, listen,
watch. the prepared information material will disseminate to the following types people in India
1) Villagers
2) Religionists
3) Illiterates
4) Farmers and farmers family members
The information in information material must be clear, in simple language, concise, the
illustrations in the printing information create interest of readers.
2.Cost.
The cost of information material depends on quantity and quality, a greater number of copies
less cost of publication, further the cost of publication will reduce which contains simple printing, less
colours, low quality paper, type of paper and size of paper.
3.Interpretation of information.
The Agricultural information is technical information it must completely understand by
farmers.
19
Ex: If there is more information folder can be prepared, less information leaflets can be printed
if there is very little information banner can be prepared by highlighting the important information.
4)Familiarity with methods and materials.
Information can be printed in various types and substances, extension offices must have
knowledge on types of printing, methods, and extension person or officer should be in position to select
the printing method according to extension information, the sheet or paper size will decide by the size
of information.
5)Availability of material.
Cost of printing in page is 12-20%, the quality of publication influenced by complexity, size
and the cost of paper should not cross 60-70%.
Advantages.
1) The information can be disseminated to large groups at a time
2) Repeated reading is possible.
3) In general people believe the printed information
4) If can be blended with teaching methods
5) The printed material available any time with needy information as per the situation.
6) It gives suggestions in day to day life with low cost
7) It helps in enhancing the potentials individuals and groups.
8) It develops the curiosity on education and helps in development of education to some extent.
Limitations.
1) Illiterates cannot read and understand the information
2) To disseminate the latest research procedures, the frequent changes in the research to be
incorporate in the content leads more expenditure on production of publications.
3) General information may not suitable to local situation.
4) There is no possibility for personal content hence printing message value is less.
Agricultural Information Material – Types.
Leaflet.
It printed one side only, it gives special information of message, it helps in satisfaction of emergency
needs.
Folders.
The Information printed in sequence, the paper folded one to three folds, in generalfolders
prepared with thick paper with colours and pictures which attracts the attention,and it used for
advertisement of products and activities.
Pamphlets.
It contains more information useful in adoption of technology by farmers necessary with information.
Circular letters.
The letters which distributed to large number of people in context to advertisement of meetings,
demonstration, farm or home problems by the extension officer or workers.
Purpose.
1. To attend meetings
2. To enhance interest
3. To make adoption of new methods
4. Service to society
5. To answer the questions
6. To increase the interest and cooperation among the local leaders and youth club members.
7. To manage pest and diseases.
20
Advantages.
1. Disseminates the information effectively at right time to the important associations and
individuals.
2. Increase the present percentage in open announcements.
3. Provides chance to request to reader but not like newsletter.
4. It helps in development of curiosity and cooperation in local leaders, demonstrations, and
coordinators.
5. These letters pass the massage very impressively as writer blends his geal and maturity.
Limitations.
1) It needs special equipment and labour
2) Decrease the impact as circulation increases
3) Not useful to the illiterates
4) Circular letters are not useful to tackle the individual problems as personal letters.
Newsletter.
It contains message pertaining to the present needs, printed on various issues in prescribed time
period, the news letters are printed in large numbers and distributed through related organization.
Bulletins.
The main objective of bulletin is to give necessary message as the per the local situation, it
contains more message and up to 20 pages.
New stories.
Dissemination of interest creative information at appropriate time to the mass of people is
called news and the message which create interest in large number of people is called best news
Newspaper gives latest, important, interest create message of the incident accurately without bias.
Objectives.
1.To create interest
2.To disseminate message to common people
3.To disseminate the information of subject matter
4. To create suitable attitudes.
5. To strengthen the extension methods, meetings and exhibitions.
Advantages.
1) Low cost
2) Dissemination of message to large number in a short time
3) This is very important instrument to disseminate the message in right time.
4) To strengthens the other extension methods
5) It strengthens the human relationship
Limitation.
1) Not useful to the illiterate
2) Estimation of results is difficult
3) Training is required to write good article
Wall News Papers.
Wall newspaper printed one side and pasted on walls, the wall newspapers aid in dissemination
problem solving or needy information on one or more than one topic at right time.
21
CHAPTER-6
INSTRUCTIONAL AIDS
(Meaning, objective & classification)
Meaning.
The instruments, material which helps to the speaker or teacher to explain the truth, skills,
attitudes, knowledge and nature to the students.
Objectives.
1) To enhance the quality and impact of teaching
2) To learn by seeing and hearing by the students
3) To modify the topic to create interest and advantageous
4) To accelerate the learning
5) To use the efforts of teacher economically
6) To Enhance the knowledge
7) To create various types of feeling and novelty to school
8) To induces interest
9) To create base for learning in combination of senses and soul
10) To develop accurate, clear and detailed feedback on learning policy
11) To meeting the requirement of own needs of each student and involvement of students
in teaching
12) To provide chance for contextual learning
13) To provide education to more people at low cost
14) To creating a disciplined environment for acceptable transfer of learning, training
15) To provide necessary education for the life course of young children and helps to raise
international awareness
16) To stimulate the thoughts and provides a goal to workon
17) To save time and money
18) To bring changes in thinking and attitude of the students
Classification
Teaching aids divided in to 3 types
1) Audio aids
2) Visual aids
3) Audio visual aids
1Audio aids: These helps in learning by listing only Ex: Radio, MP3 Speeches
2Visual aids: These helps in learning by seeing only
a) Non projected: Ex: Model, specimens, photographs, panelgraph, flash cards,
charts, posters, bulletin board
B) Projected: Ex: Slides, silent films, film stories, epidiascope, open projectors, or
overhead projects and LCD projectors
3 Audio visual aids These provides learning through hearing and watching
Ex: Television, videos, vlogs, you tub, video calls, dramas, puppet shows, webinars
a. Display type: Poster, bulletin boards, models
b Presentation type: Power point presentations, vlogs, Flash cards, pull charts,
slides etc.
22
The cone of experience
Dr Edgardel arranged the audio-visual aids in cone shape and he called it as (The cone of
experience)
Audio aids
Silent films
Television
Exhibitions & Exposure visits
Result demonstration
Drama, puppet shows
LCeahranirntgs b&y bmoinagp s
Records
Causing direct intent
experience
Fig.5. Cone of experience
Cone of experience.
1. Causing the experience of direct intentions
2. The experience causes by the tool or practice
3. The experience of dramas and puppet shows
4. Result demonstrations
5. Exposure visits
6. Silent films, cinemas
7. Charts, Maps and graphs
The cone of experience developed to express the interrelationship in between audiovisual aids,
from bottom to top, concrete to abstract experiences displayed, hence to successful education in
possible with help of the cone of experience
Audio visual aids are two types based on projection
a) Projected
b) Non projected
Projected: Silence films, slides, Mookie cinemas
With help of the above projected aids large group can watch and learn
Non projected: Posters, flash cards, charts etc. are suitable for small groups
Anything we cannot learn by listening and watching but knowledge improves when listening
and doing in correct way, to know the development of village, extension officer has to dugout the
emotions of villagers, with help of this extension officer know the status of emotions in development of
knowledge, audio-visual aids are valuable to know the subject clearly.
The audio-visual aids help in four ways as follows
1) To learn number of subjects
2) To learn quickly
3) To remember for long time the things learned
4) To learn perfectly
23
CHAPTER – 7
EXTENSION PROGRAMME PLANNING
(Meaning of planning, programme, project, calendar of work, plan of work, principals
of programme planning and steps in programme planning development process)
Extension programme
Leagons (1961) – An extension programme is a set of clearly defined, concisely conceived
educational objectives derived from an adequate analysis of the situation, which are to be achieved
through extension teaching
Programme planning
The process bringing desirable changes is programme planning constituency and development
intermittent process in the programme to active these diligences, and cooperation extension programme
must be carried out in a proper manner, to bring desirable changes in villagers it should be the one that
provides the proper knowledge of the area
Project
A project is an outline of procedure pertains to some phases of extension work
Calendar of work
It is chronologically arranged a plan of work
Plan of work
It is an outline of activities so arranged as to enable efficient execution of the entire programme
it answers the questions how, when, where and by whom the work is to be done
Principles of programme planning
According to Kelsey and Hearne, sound extension programme building
1.Program planning is based on analysis of the facts in the situation
2.Program planning selects problems based on needs and interest of local people
3.Program planning determines definite objective and solutions, which offer satisfaction
4.Program planning has permanence with flexibility
5.Program planning has a definite plan of work
6.Programplanning is an educational process
7.Program planning is a continuous process
8.Program planning is a coordinating process
9.Program planning involves local people and their institutions
10.Program planning provides for evaluation of results
11.Program planning has balance with emphasis
6
5
Steps in programme development process - Fig. 6
1. Collection and analysis of data
4 7
2. Determination of needs and objectives
3. Definition (Identification of problems)
3
4. Finding solutions
8
5. Selection of problems and determine priorities
6. Preparation of plan of action
7. Carryout the plan 2
8. Checking and evaluation of results
9. Review of progress and projection of plans
1 9
1) Collection, analysis, and evaluation of data
24
Writing of extension programme and plan completely depends on collection of reliable,
complete information, scientific analysis and description of meaning to write perfect programme
planning extension officers must have complete knowledge on crop sequence, yield factors, and crop
management hence extension officers must have realistic information of farm and home
2) Determination of objectives
Identification of needs of villagers are prime important to decide the introduction of programme
plan in village, the needs may be individual or social in extension programme planning Importance to
be given community development needs or prioritize the community needs for programme planning,
tailor the objectives as per the prioritized community needs programme planning must be in democratic
mode, the objectives which are framed depends on village needs in turn these objectives must bring
desirable changes in personality, and social situations
3) Definition of problems
Divide the programme plan as per the sequence, good programme planning dugout the
capacities of participants, it provides chance to reach goal and the problems to be solved classified as
follows
a) Problems solved by the villagers themselves by utilizing the existing facilities and resources
b) Construction of roads, sewage channels in village by cooperative societies in village.
c) In coordination with village people big programmes like, construction of schools, plantation,
fertilizer and plants distribution can be enduring
Finding Solutions to Problems
Extension officer and village assistant as to describe the programme planning step by step to the
villagers, the villages need to know the things in detail, appropriate teaching methods should be used
Selecting Problems to be tackled
The solutions to the problem should be identified according to the socio-economic conditions of
the villagers, reconsideration to what extent the results have been achieved in the eyes of the village
people Perceptive which plan has to be fully implemented and which has not been implemented can
help to solve the problem easily by implementing the known plan very carefully and in the right
manner
Annual plan of work
Determine how to achieve set out goals in the form of work, the results demonstration,
discussions, meetings, family meetings by extension officers etc. cooperative societies, schools, youth
organizations etc. helps to fulfill the goals, the plan should be prepared in the simplest way with help of
village institutes and organizations
The programme should be prepared in the form of table for every month, divide the set-out
goals for the year plan in to quarterly goals determine the goals that need to be achieved immediately
based on them, plan should be prepared in some cases, it is necessary to create monthly goals, because
of this everyone engaged in goal setting and occasionally revisits and makes some adjustment if
necessary
25
Carry out the plan
The success of plan depends on process of implementation of the programme, supply of
fertilizers, equipment, seeds, funds, audio visual equipment, books or texts, should be made available
on time, establishment of training centers are very important, negotiation with the villages regarding
programme to be done which will clarify the suspicions then the programme will continue smoothly,
train the important members of the village, farmers, members of grama panchayath on the programme
to be done
Continuous checking and evaluation of results
Each programme plan need to be recorded, evaluation can be done easily because of the
recorded programme, evaluation should be done with the help of government employees panchayath
member and villagers
the future programme depends on this decision, only proper evaluation will help the programme
to work properly, the record helps to compare the programme with the core objectives
Review of process and projections of plans
The development should not be considered as success of the programme, development it like a
tool to full fill a powerful programme how to implement the effectively prepared or energy intensive
programme in the village will be known by the review
26
CHAPTER – 8
EVALUATION
(Meaning, elements, degrees and Importance of evaluation in extension)
Meaning. Evaluation is the determination the value of a work or object as a source
Formal evaluation
The process of formation of opinion of work or an object depending on its values and use, the
main advantage is to make effective decisions rather than making hasty decision
Extension evaluation
It is process of determining whether desired behavioral changes we have achieved through
extension education or at what extent changes have been taking up
Elements of evaluation
1) Observation of collection of information or subject
2) Application of some standards, or methods to the observations
3) Coming to final decision, or taking some decisions
Degrees of evaluation
Day to day Self-check or Evaluating Extension Scientific
evaluation or an self- corrections themselves education research
evaluation that is evaluation
usually done on
daily basis
-----------Informal--------- -------------Formal -----------
Casual every day evaluation
We make valuable decisions every day, simple observations are required in each case, it is very
important to recognize the differences between what we think, what we see and what is really exists
Limitations
➢ Utilization of personal ideas instead of standard metrics
➢ Lack of logical thinking and unable to prevention personal bias
➢ Lack of a systematic plan for making decisions
➢ Lack of complete information
Self-checking evaluation
Making strong effort to attribute the main principles of evaluation
Example: Check under general scrutiny, talking to others and making decisions for other
Do-it your self-evaluation
Careful planning in a systematic way by attributions the basic principles of evaluation, for this
method of evaluation surveys are score cards are necessary
Extension studies
The extension evaluation studies are very complex, mostly scientific approach will be adopted
27
Scientific research
Systematic research to determine the relationship between cause-and-effect relationships
scientifically
a) Realistic are legitimate – measure what to be measure
b) Analytical
c) Believable - Representative sample of group lack of change in result
d) Goal - No bias, other also get the same results
e) Impartial - willingness and inquiry perspective
Importance of evaluation in agricultural extension
1) Extension evaluation is useful determining the extent to which key aspirations and specific
objectives have been achieved
2) Extension evaluation useful to design the tests for time bound, quality improvement, sustainable
works
3) It is useful to place a restraint or check on extension teaching methods
4) It is useful in make available the information needed to write an extension action plan
5) Forms a base for plan, for change of plan
6) By setting goal related project value, it creates base for changes in plan
7) The extension evaluation contributes to understand the achievement of work to collaborators
leaders
8) Helps to identify strong as weak point sin any plan
9) Verifying the planning and administration policies and systems outcome or results
10) It helps in establishing the bender mark
11) Gives information about people who have worked with us
28
CHAPTER – 9
SOCIOLOGY AND RURAL SOCIOLOGY
(Importance of rural sociology in extension education, characteristics of rural society
differences between rural & urban community)
The term sociology was coined by Auguste Comte (1789-1875) who is often referred as the
father of sociology, He named it from two words from Latin, “Socious” meaning companion and other
word from Greek, “Logos” meaning speech or reasoning
Sociology
The study of society
Rural Sociology
It is the study of the sociology of life in the rural environment, which systematically studies the
rural communities to discover their conditions, tendencies and formulate the principles of progress as
the term implies, it is limited to the study of various aspects of rural society
Importance of rural sociology in extension education
1. In the context to community development and rural development programme deliberate efforts
are made to bring about social change in rural areas the change is brought about not in a
vacuum but in a structure of human relations, which necessitates the study of rural sociology
2. An extension worker is change agent, he or she has to bring about changes in the rural culture,
therefore, understand the cultures in which extension officer has to bring about changes
3. In the cross-cultural situation, it is likely that the change agent may develop the “ethnocentric
attitude” which makes him or her difficult to work successfully, study of rural sociology helps
to overcome this difficulty
4. Sometimes the change agent, while working in rural communities, does not keep the established
pattern of hierarchy, this creates problems in working Rural sociology helps to understand the
some and its importance
5. The “Value system” of individuals, families, groups and communities is an important factor to
be kept in mind while trying to bring about changes in the farming communities
Characteristics of Indian Rural Society
1. Village is part of rural society the people living in the village live in harmony according their
caste and society customs, cast is priority aspect in rural society, the cast dictates the social and
economic relations between rural people traditional, cast based professions are common, not
only economic activities but also religious activities in the society require cooperation between
various casts, large villages have more population compared to small villages are home to all
sorts cast based professions, every one united and financially self-sufficient further they leads a
religious life
2. The village is social and cultural unit, a system with save values in all over India, in rural India
odds are generally same
3. The characteristics and structures of the village depends on villagers Nationalists, religion,
language and cast, only one cast dwell in some village, as hamlets Ex Agraharam, schedule cast
streets (Maharajula colonies) although different castes live in the same village, they naturally
live-in different places of the same village, gaps between different castes can be observed,
villagers speak languages related to their respective religions
4. Women living in rural areas do not have equal nights with men in their lifestyle it can be
observed that the wearing of parade or curtain due to the rituals of some religion
29
5. Rural India mainly dependent on agriculture, owning land is great advantage not only for
financial security but also respect in the society
6. Each village has its own system, powers and permissions according to panchayat raj act each
village has an administrative system according to local laws
7. Social formation conveys the nature of the village modern transport and access to information
change the shape of the village
8. The village solutions are usually control by the customs of the village, the appearance of the
village depends on the language, dress and customs of the people living in it, some villages
have dissatisfaction and corruption while others have genericity and honesty, some villages
have cooperation while others have factions
Difference between rural and urban community
S. No Rural community Urban community
1 The way of life in closely related to The way of life is artificial, complicated, and
nature away from nature
2 Low population density High population density
3 Similarity in races and psychological Greater difference compared to rural
character sticks community
4 Theological culture Secular culture
5 Low social relationships High social relationships secondary
basic relationships are important, relationships are important, relationships are
relationships last for long time not personal, relations stand for short time
obedience and modesty appear in modesty obedience do not appear in
relationship relationships
6 Organizations arise from way of life of Legal institutes are more
rural society
7 The unity as -I and we are greater The unity as - I and we are poor or less
8 Simple and single group community Community of complex, with different
groups
9 Rural social life is stable without Urban lifestyle is undergoing rapid change
change
10 Rural society is primarily dependent on Industrialization and technologies are clearly
land and agriculture as the main source visible, people depend on daily wages for
of livelihood their livelihood
11 The correlation between those who High density population compared to rural
farming and the size of the villages is areas
negative
12 Rural areas do not have many classes in People in urban areas do not have self
vital occupations, they can make the sufficiency
food, accommodation and clothes to
some extent they need
13 Social division is less but casteism is More social division less casteism
more
14 Social mobility is low in terms of land More social mobility, urbanization and
and occupation large number of people movements are in proportion to each other,
emigrate from rural to urban areas people migrate from towns to villages only
when catastrophic events occur
30
CHAPTER – 10
RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Meaning, objective and problems)
Rural development is a process that need to be undertaken continuously without interruption,
many service minded greats experimented with rural development prior to independence, they active
the success to some to extent in development, but it is restricted to certain areas Therefore, rural
development gain prominence after 1970, accordingly these programmes are included in the five years
plan, in five years plan emphasized agriculture, agricultural allied activities and rural industries
Meaning
Basically, development means exposing or revealing the subtle in context to human it is about
extracting or letting of the forces or power within them the programme of development of living
conditions of rural people is called rural development, i.e., agriculture and allied branches, rural and
cottage industries and handloom, socio- economic facilities, community services and human resource
development is called rural development
Rural development is the process of achieving continuous improvement in the living conditions
of rural people especially poor
Rural development – Definition
1Rural development is the process of improving the economic development
2Rural development is providing the benefits available through development programme to the
poorest of the poor in rural areas
Rural development - Objectives
1. Bringing the labour force of village under on plan for economic development
2. Gathering of creative energy in rural areas
3. Moving urban population to the countryside (villages) so that prevent the immigration of
villages to the towns
4. Making women and youth more involved in development programmes
5. Improving the living standards of the villages by blending in to the environment
6. Developing the available human resources in all sorts of ways in the country
Problems in rural development
1) Majority villagers are illiterate to mould the villagers towards development projector through,
result demonstrations, individual and community methods, training programmes needed a
greater number of extension officers and workers
2) There are no means of expression like mass media
3) Inadequate staff and funds to provide proper training to farmers
4) Traditional society adopts old trends and methods, does not like to change without seeing
results
5) It is difficult to extract the true leadership from illiterate traditional society
6) Extension officers or workers with specialized skills are needed to teach the villages with new
approaches and with new policies
7) The needs of individuals and communities very according to circumstances
8) System barriers or constitutional barriers
9) The unclear objectives of the system
31
CHAPTER – 11
PARTICIPATORY RURAL APPRISAL
(Meaning, salient features, principles and techniques)
Meaning
Methods that lead to mutual learning between rural people and extension officers or workers is
called PRA in rural area PRA widely used not only in project appraisal but also throughout the project
cycle and in scientific research too
Definition
PRA is an approach and methods for learning about rural life and conditions from, with and by
rural people He further stated that PRA extends in to analysis, planning and action PRA closely
involves villagers and local officials in the process – Chambers-1992
Participatory rural appraisal is a family of approaches and methods to enable local people to
share, enhance, and analyze their knowledge of life and conditions, to plan, and to act- Robert chamber
It is a methodology to involve rural community by interacting with them and understanding
them along with their locality
Salient features
Triangulation
Comparing and correction of data that come through diverse methods at different times
The accuracy can be achieved through collection of various types of information from different
types of organization rather than a statistical model
The triangular approach is done by combination of information centers, procedures and team
structure
Multi-disciplinary team
Policies
Interviews & Discussions
Who knows the internal Team
things & outsiders Male& female
Source of
Instrumen
ts & informatio Places
Obser vations Procedure Maps Peopl n
s e
Fig.7 - Triangular approach method
Multidisciplinary -Team:
Members of team should have a deep understanding with deep insight, cooperating each other,
all members must participate in all matters relating to PRA, make sure there are more women and grass
root level people in the PRA, the team members of PRA always have opportunity to learn from others
Mix of Techniques
PRA team utilize the observations, interviews, discussions, drawings and variety of techniques
in this context as per the situation
Flexibility and informality
Plans and research methods are partially structured and modified, PRA as progress at the field
level they adopt to changing circumstances and become innovative
Involvement of community
PRA team members should be kind towards members of the community and see their lives and
problems through the eyes of members, plan, writing and analysis should be done together with
32
community members, members who have an intimate relationship they help in data description,
understanding and analysis
Optimal ignorance and appropriate imprecision
The PRA team does not collect unnecessary information, precision and unnecessarily collection
information as much as information any PRA method is determined based on onsite analysis
On the spot analysis
Learning takes place in the field data analysis also part of the field activity, the PRA team
decides which side to look at or proceed based on reviews and analysis
Research methods in social science
First round of information gathering
On the spot analysis
Second round of information
Narrowing the
focus On the spot analysis
Accumulating Final round of information
Knowledge gathering
Fig.8 Final analysis in PRA Method
Principals of PRA
1. Participation: PRA in highly depends on community partnership this method enhances the
participation of local people, the PRA designed to make local people not only source of
information but also in data collection and analysis
2. Flexibility: The method are techniques we choose will depend on the place of work, available
resources, skills, size expertise
3. Team work: If the role of extensionist is initiator and assistant, the PRA will be organized
effectively with the local people, the extension activist or officer should see that there more
women and backward class and poor people
4. Optical Ignorance: Gathering of the information need to make necessary suggestions, decisions
and effective in terms of time and money
5. Reliability: The data due to the nature of the quality and the size of the sample may not useful
for statistical study, but the decisions from the information that come through the data collected
from are more confident and circulation
6. Triangulation: This is method of cross checking-the truth it can be obtain by different methods,
evidences, divisions, information providers
7. Offset biases: The PRA team gives high priority on poor, women, and those with adverse
conditions, it prevents much talking to the rich and well-educated people
8. Reversal learning: Mutual learning by face-to-face interaction with rural people on the spot,
this learning acquired through local, physical, technical and social knowledge
33
PRA Techniques.
Mapping techniques: Maps are drawn by the group of villages with a stick as piece of chalk on
ground or on big size paper, this method informs not only the physical characteristics of the
surrounding areas of the group but also socio-economic conditions, it also indicates what the
participants perception about the community, this map will be used by the PRA team for further
discussion, we can create different types of maps according to our programmes
Social mapping: Social mapping is a visual representation of residential area with social information,
it gives information about the boundaries of an area habitat, infrastructure, socio-cultural and religious
institutions, the social maps are drawn by the group first on ground with the participation of the local
people and then on paper with appropriate markings and colours, these maps are used during the
discussion with the community for the first time and mapping aggravate not only excitement but also
eliminates unnecessary fear in villagers
Transact walk: It is a structured walk in identified areas by PRA team, this walk will be done by a
team who are well versed in area, this group helps by pointing out and discussing all aspects of the area
during the walk, this is useful for determination of social map, these walks help to the extension officer
to focus on some major issues
Venn - diagrams: The diagram useful to understand the role of different organization in lives of
people, inter relationships and their importance it also known as chapatti diagram because of the use of
round cut papers in analysis, this whole process is useful to learn how people understand these
organizations in their real life This method is most effective when people in the same group are in
discussion, these is likely to be more discussion on one topic, the extension officer should assist the
people involved in the discussion to come to a decision
Ranking Technique: In general, four types of ranking techniques are used in PRA
Problems and preference Ranking: The people involved in this method are asked to tell the
problems they are facing, after this asked to indicate the issues in order of priority
Matrix Ranking and Scoring: The choices we make in this method should be analysed by the multi
criterion method
Pair-wise ranking: Combining the two different options in a topic and once
Wealth ranking: Identifying and analyzing the different economic groups is called wealth ranking It
helps to the extension officer to understand social and economic classes of persons in village and
symbols of properties and definitions of wealth in the eyes of local people
Trend Analysis: These are usually visual based methods these are three types.
1) This method is useful for analyzing recurring seasonal challenges
Timeline: This is a special method advantageous to understand how people are thinking that the
selected items and indicators have changed over time
Daily activity chart: Showing the daily routine of the people in the community through a line diagram,
this method is very useful to compare the daily routines of different people in the society
34
CHAPTER – 12
LEADERSHIP
(Meaning, classification, features, selection and training)
Meaning:
Leadership is the ability of one or more people to work together as a group to provide support
and assistance in meeting their roles and the needs of the group -Heppel
Leadership is about to mutual helping of groups with unique characteristics to support each
other to raise awareness on a subject- Hoffer and Gibson
Leadership means living in a group for a task or activity to build relationships between people
and help them to achieve what they set out to do -Rogers and Demster.
Classification of leaders:
According Whyte leaders are four types:
1) Operational leaders
2) Popularity leaders
3) Assumed representative type leadership
4) Prominent or talent leader
Operational leader: These persons who actually initiate action within the group regardless of whether
or not they hold an elected office
Popularity leader: Means in a group a popular person will be elected to a position of leadership
because the members like him sometimes such individual may or may not be the actual leader of the
group, such persons holding elective positions do very little about initiating action for the group and
are mere figureheads as ornamental leaders They are also called ornamental leaders and they are also
called nominal leaders
Assumed representative type: Refers to a person selected to work with a committee or other leaders
because the latter (Group B) have assumed that he represents another group (Group A) they desire to
work with; he may or may not be a leader of the group (Group A)
Group-A
Group-B
Fig.9. Assumed representative type - Leader
Prominent talent leader: These leaders are skilled and intellectual and expertise in the field in which
they work Ex: Artist, singers,
Another classification:
Professional leaders: Who receive specialized training to the field in which they work and reap the
rewards for the work they do
Example: Agri. Extension officer, Grama sevika etc
35
Lay leaders:
May or may not receive specialized professional training but, there is no payment for their work
in local communities they work on temporary basis, they are called volunteer leaders, local leaders, and
natural leaders Ex: President of youth club, village volunteer
Modern classification of leaders:
As per the results of modern research, pattern of utilization the leaders are divided in to three types
1) Autocratic leaders,
2) Democratic leaders,
3) Laissez – fair leaders
Autocratic leaders: He does not trust anyone in his way of thinking, the subordinates are do not do
what they supposed to do, he thinks the employee will get remuneration hence they must work, if he is
a benevolent (kind) autocrat he may tend to view employees as children and encourage them to come
to him with all their problems, no matter what is the nature or magnitude of the problem
Democratic leaders: The leader discuss with the group members about the decisions and planning he
made, he encourages each member to participate he works, and each member to take responsibility, he
tries to know the employee level and their attitudes He criticizes someone not with the intention of
making them do so but only to get results or if he criticizes, he does so in terms of results expected,
rather than on the basis of personalities
Lassez – Faire leaders: He believes that the work will be completed quickly if the workers are left
alone, he has no faith in him If possible, he avoids making decisions, he tries keep away from group or
crowd, and He is often a rationalist
Effect of Lassez - Faire leaders’ leadership
1) Low moral stability and productivities in the group
2) Employees have no rest and no incentives given to them
3) Employees consider job security to be a grate incentive
4) Often a person who is friendly or unrelated firm decisions person will be born in group
5) Governance, supervision and coordination issues will be doubled
Selection of professional leaders
A- Interview
1. The time-honored and most widely used method of selecting persons for position of
professional leadership It is based primarily upon an interview and an evaluation of past
academic and occupational records of the individual A large amount of information
concerning a person can be acquired through an interview
2. The chief difficulty with the interview is that one can observe and evaluate the applicant only
as he answers questions during a brief period of time
3. In industry and management there has been an attempt or supplement the interview by
subjecting applicants to a battery of tests
4. These tests measure ability, aptitudes, attitudes and interests and both the academic training
and practical experience
5. The use of a battery of tests along with an interview provides a better basis for selection than
using the interview alone
36
B. Performance Tests.
1. These have been used in certain situations as a part of the basis for selection of
professional leaders
2. One type of these is the ‘Leaderless group tests’ in which seven or eight persons are
given a common task to perform and it is left up to the personnel involved to determine
which person have to become the leader
3. Another type of test is to appoint an individual as a leader and then observe how well he
directs the activities of the members of the group
4. The big advantage of these performance tests is that one can observe the potential leader
in a real-life situation in which he is functioning as the leader of a group
Selection of lay leaders:
1 Sociometry:
This method of selection of leader is whenever extension officer visits the village,
the individual who asked about agriculture and allied sector information more frequently,
he or she will be identified as leader
A
H B
G
C
F
E D
Fig. 10. Sociogram
2. Election method
In this method the group members elect a leader by voting the extension officer assists
to the group members in electing a person by explaining the initiative that leader should be taken
when problems arise, and choosing right person for the right job, this method is also used in
leadership training
37
3. Discussion method.
In this method leader will be elected by his perfect knowledge and ability, the discussion
method helps by giving confidence and excitement to the leader to emerge as leader
4.Workshop method.
In this method large group divided in to small groups, programme responsibility and
decision depends on small groups, leader arises from each group from time-to-time extension
officer recognize who takes responsibilities first in first and he/she will be elected as leader
5.Group observer:
The extension workers or officer identifies the leader at any time while the group is
working in this method group members should not know they are under observation
6.Key informants
In this method people are asked to indicate the names of local leader, this method saves the
time and money
7.Self-designating technique: In this method the person who is going to elect as leader asked
series of equations, and through him they come to know at what level he is to be elect as
leader.
Training of leaders:
The notion that leadership is something that can be taught and learned leads to the training
of the leaders
a) Training of professional leaders.
Background courses in colleges and other institutions. Aspiring students for
professional leadership require a broad understanding of social conditions hence he must
have knowledge in psychology and sociology along with general college education
Induction Training
A new professional leader trained by experienced trained leader it is more likely to have
successful learning
Or
Apprenticeship experience under the direction of a trained and experienced leader in the
field will enable the new professional leader to develop his abilities for successful leadership
In-service training.
This is training is given to the professional leaders for constantly improving their
38
efficiency by focusing attention upon the problems they have faced in the field and the ways to
solve them In-service training has become increasingly important in view of the fast-changing
technology in agriculture in recent times
39
CHAPTER-13
DEVELOPMENTAL PROGRAMMES
(Pre-Independence & Post-Independence)
A lot of experiments have been conducted on the people of our country especially for the
betterment of the poor people before and other independence The details of programmes given
below
Pre – independence
1) Srinikethan project
2) Sevagram
3) Marthandam project
4) Guragoan experiment
Srinikethan project or Srinikethan experiment (1914):
Srinikethan launch in 1914 can be considered as first attempt of rural development issues,
the project was started by Rabindranath Tagore at Srinikethan of west Bengal, intended to
improve economic and social conditions
Eradications of monkey and malaria as first attempt for development, later best practices
in agriculture were introduced with good desi breed cows and hens, educational facilities were
provided for young children as well as adults, villagers were taught the use of new agricultural
implements by demonstrations, in some villages these programmes achieved good results and
improved the living standards and economical status of the people
This programme has not been there for long time due to lock of professionals who are
familiar with various subjects and trained, as well as lack expected contribution from government
Sevagram (1921)
In 1921 Gandhiji started efforts for rural development at sevagram of vaardha district of
Maharashtra, introduced the use of organic fertilizer in agriculture, hybrid production programme
in case of livestock, educational system called “NAYATHALIM” for children and adults,
changes in the village administrations and made new changes in every aspect of rural life
Marthandam Project (1921)
Dr Spencer H started this project at Marthandam which is famous for business in Kerala,
the people are suffering due to inappropriate agricultural lands, less number of cottage industries
low quality products, inadequate labour, water scarcity, debts etc
40
Objectives of Marthandam Project
✓ Implementation of programmes designed by the people for reconstruction of the village
extension activists and officers are merely advisors to achieve their goals
✓ Giving advices to people to help themselves
✓ Those who need more help should more profitable as they are poor
✓ Establish a comprehensive plan for the development of villages, more attention paid on
poultry, apiculture, cottage industries like knitting baskets, knitting mates
✓ Every programme should be as simple as possible for people to follow
✓ Utilization of extension services of those who give service with or without stipend
✓ Training to public service workers in various fields
Gurugram experiment.
The project initiated by deputy commissioner of Gurugram district “F L Brown” in
Gurugram district of Punjab
1. Institutional work the school of rural economy was set up to train the guides for
development of villages they were trained in the farms affiliated to the schools on
agriculture, cooperation, for betterment of people, sanitation etc after they appointed as
village guides
2. Village sanitation to prevent the cholera and plague, compost pits duged deposited the
village waste
3. Development of Agriculture A scheme was set up to adopt Gurugam plough, new
implements, light traps in fields, eradication of monkey, rats and insects, the small
holdings are converted in large holdings with people cooperation The main concept of the
scheme is to produce more yield per hector
4. Education Instruction was given to school teachers to act as consultants in development
programmes of agriculture, health, social status
5. Cooperation The contributions was seen as stepping stone to the revival of the village and
it was stated that everyone should give their full contribution to the economic
reconstruction of the village
6. Social transformation as part of social service:
1) Eradication of child marriages
2) Introduction of coeducation
3) Removing of “Parada” curtain simulation culture
4) Reducing the more expenditure to the good deeds
5) Eradication of debtors
The experiment created awareness in people and government in reconstruction of villages
41
Post-independence
1 Firka
2 Etawah project
3 Nilokheri
Firka (1946)
1) The scheme was introduced by “Tongutar Prakasham panthulu” for the first time in
1946, with aim to “All round development of rural life”
2) By arousing exciting interest on this issue in the country side through this scheme and
preparing them self-sufficient and self-reliant
3) Agricultural development, rural industries, sanitation health, rural education and cultural
development are intended under this scheme
4) For the first time this scheme is enabled in 34 firkas, it was expanded to 108 firkas at the
end of 1953, afterwards this was merged in to community development scheme
Etowah project:
The project was setup in 64 villages for the first time after spread to 300 villages in
coordination with Albert Mayer in 1948 at etava district of Uttarpradesh, after this programme
was undertaken in other four centers of “Uttarpradesh”, the prototype of the project was become
ideal for community development and National Extension Service (NES) programmes
Special features
1) Preparation of comprehensive planning for development of village following or
considering the views of people, public and non-governmental organization
2) Observation of programmes which are working based on efforts and experiments as well
as reasons for not working
3) Implementation of determined programmes in small area and understanding the
organizational and administration models in implementation, and determining the suitable
programme to implement in large scale
Objectives
1) To examine the extent of achievement in production, social development, people self-
confidence and cooperation in villages of the district
2) To confirm how quickly get the results from above, mentioned factors, to diagnose the
financial resources status of state to provide men and material to above said items
Programme undertaken
42
1) Enhancement of agricultural production by development of good quality seeds, chemical
fertilizers, green manure crops, modern implements, irrigation facilities, plant protection
and horticultural crops
2) Introduction of high-quality animals, and adoption of disease preventive methods and
good management practices
3) Provision of credits through cooperative services there by arranging necessary item,
increase the production and cooperation in sales
4) Controlling and preventing human tragedies
5) Implementation mother and child welfare programme
6) Adult education establishment for consideration of development of programmes
undertaken in various areas, training programme to leaders to conduct field demonstration
Nilokheri 1947
This scheme aimed at self-sufficiency through village organization connecting 7000
Pakistanis in 100 adjoining villages of India This scheme called as “Mazdoor Manzil”
43
CHAPTER – 14
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Community:
Society refers to people who have social relationship in a geographical area, there may be
one or more communities in the same community
Community development:
- Community development is technically aided and locally organized self help
- Community development is a process of government efforts united with those of this
people to improve the social, cultural and economic conditions in communities
Community development – objectives
The basic feature of community development in over country is development of people as
destination of man
Important objectives
1) Economic development
2) Social justice
3) Democratic progress
Establishment of well-functioning panchayath, cooperative society, and school in each
village, preparation of comprehensive plan for development of family, village, mandal, blocks and
districts through these institutions
Preparation of plan and implementation on following issues
1) Enhancement of production
2) Development of village industries
3) Establishing minimum health facilities
4) Establishing educational facilities
5) Conducting psychological development programmes
6) Undertaking of women and child development programmes
In India community development programme was started on 02121952, as part of this 55-
community development project were organized in our country and development was supported
each project consists of 300 villages, 2 lakh population and 1,50,000 acres of agricultural land
44
Each project was divided in to 3 blocks each block consists of 100 villages, 60,000 to
70,000 population, for the first-time good rainfall or irrigated lands were selected for development
works, each project aims to be completed within a period of three years the three years period will
be divided in to five parts and programmes will be undertaken
1) Emergence phase Programmes such as area selection survey and planning are carried
out
2) Early-stage Provision of temporary accommodation for staff establishment of transport
facilities in the respective areas and procurement of required material
3) Work phase Implementation of desired or targeted programmes
4) Integrated phase the works pending up to this stage it need to be completed
5) Final stage Finishing touches to all works currently the project was implemented in
three places of Andhra Pradesh
a. East Godavari – Kakinada & Peddapuram
b. Kurnool and Kadapa – K.C. canal area
c. Nallagonda – Miryalguda and Huzurnagar
Principles of community development
Needs of people: The programmes to be undertaken to meet the minimum requirements in the
community
Multipurpose programmes.
Little progress is being made due to the efforts we make without our knowledge, but
holistic and balance community development is possible by undertaking multi use programmes
with the efforts of all
Change of attitudes.
The change in the attitudes of the people in the early stages of development is essential for
the success of programmes for community development
Participation of the people.
Increasing the public participation in community issues, local government revival in its
current form and transition towards local governance are important objectives of community
development
45
Local leadership
The main purpose of any community development programme should be identification of
local leadership, encouragement and providing training
Participation of women and youth
Involvement of youth and women in community development, leads ensuring the fruits of
development for the most part, and enables the long-term sustainable development programmes
Assistance by government
With full support from government to self-help projects which aimed at community
development will work effectively
Consistent policies and administrative arrangements
To undertake the programmes for community development at the national level
requirements as follows
1) Practicing the consistent operational policies and establishment of separate administration
2) Recruitment and training of employees
3) Mobilization of local and national resources
4) Research system - experiments and evaluation
Voluntary non-governmental organizations
Utilize the resources of nongovernmental organizations at the local, national, and
international levels in community development programmes
Economical and Social progress
The social and economic development that takes place locally, undercovers the need to do
the same at national level `
46
CHAPTER – 15
PANCHAYATH RAJ SYSTEM
Introduction
Local self-governance is look after the affairs of villages, towns, cites, mandals, district by
themselves, in a democratic system people must be a partners in governance, hence proper
training is necessary for people, solving the problems of people from all parts of the country is a
difficult task for the government hence introduced the local government with aim of achieving
solution to formation of roads, education, health facilities, street lights, drinking water tec
Maintained by local self-governing bodies
For the first time in our country local self-governing bodies were formed during Mouryan
period, in India “Lord rippan” fundamentally happed the local government bodies by following
government laws in 1882, hence he called father of local governance the team local government
is enshrined in article 40 of part IV of the Indian constitution
Democratic Decentralization
Democracy is of the people, for the people and by the people (Adrahamlinkon), people are
given highest priority in democracy, articulation of the centralized administrative power to the
institutions which are close and convenient to the people is called democratic decentralization,
decentralization means administration is more closeness to the people
Democratic Decentralization need
The community development programme is setup in such a way as to contribute to the
development of the people with the participation of people living in that village, but with the poor
as without participation of people in community development programmes the expected results
could not be achieved, hence the central government constituted committee on 16th January 1956
under the chairmanship of “BALVANTHRAI MEHATHA”, this committee mainly recommended
for three tire panchayatiraj system
In accordance with the principles and command in the constitution of India, introduced the
Panchayath Raj System for the first time in Rajasthan in 1st- November-1959, Panchayath Raj
system implemented at Shamshabad of Hyderabad as second phase
Three tiers of panchayath raj system
Based on the recommendation of “Balawanth Rai Mehta” committee, Grampanchayat,
Panchayati Samithy and Zilla parishaths were established, they gradually become todays
Grampanchayats, Mandals parishads and Zilla parishads for the benefit of rural people, in modern
India, socio economic development plans are being implemented, therefore the panchayat raj
system is of utmost importance
47
The following terms are defined by the Andhra Pradesh Panhayat Raj act
1) District: A district is a specific territorial area of a state
2) Village meeting: Meeting of the members of the voters, registered in the voters list of
villages
3) Secondary level as middle level: The secondary level is that the level in-between district
and village level is considered as secondary level, it is done by on a note by the panchayat
raj commissioner as per the advice of the district collector through public notification
4) Area of panchayat: Area within the boundaries of a panchayath
5) Village: Area notified by the district collector is termed as a village
Three tired Panchayati Raj system:
1) The lower level means the Grampanchayat in the village
2) Intermediate level as middle level i.e., panchayat samiti in blocks
3) The upper level is the zilla parishad in the district
Grampanchayat.
A panchayath is formed if the minimum population is 250, but today every village with a
population of 500 and has one panchayat, there are 27,445-gram panchayaths un combined
state(Telangana state -12,765), the gram panchayat president is called the Grama sarpanch, the
village sarpanch is elected by secret ballot by all village voters, each village is divided in to 6 -16
wards on the basis of population, one member from each ward is elected by the gram panchayath
voters The number of panchayat members not be less than 5 and not more than 20, women,
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes are elected by exclusively allocating certain seats, ward
members elect one of them as village deputy sarpanch, gram panchayat tenure is five years
Gram panchayat – functions
1) Public health and sanitation
2) Water supply
3) Street lights
4) Birth and deaths registrations
5) Women and child care
6) Establishing roads, tanks and wells and repairing tec In the village
7) Arrangements of primary education
8) Establishment of hospitals, libraries and study zones
9) Celebration of festivals, pilgrims and fairs
10) Tree plantation in government land
11) Collection of house and occupation tax.
12)
48
Gram panchayat revenue
Gram panchayaths perform duties themselves by collecting taxes of house and occupation,
receiving funds from government is addition to this, taking the donations from the public, the
government appoints executive officers to the panchayaths
Village meeting
Villages have not only gram panchayath but also village meetings, all the voters in the
village are members of the Grama sabha, this house or village meeting members meets twice a
year, the meeting is presided over by the village Surpanch, but if is he is not available the village
deputy surpanch chairs the session, during the meeting the Gram panchayat administration report
will be discussed newly imposed taxes, increased taxes and other important issues,
Grampanchayat try to implement all the suggestion of village meeting
Panchayat Samithi
The members of panchayat samiti are elected on various grounds
1) All the sarpanches of panchayat block
2) Constituency MLAs related to that panchayat block
3) The MP can be member from any panchayat samiti of their choice
Two women (one must from minority) and three from backward classes elected in
cooption method the president of the samiti is directly elected by voters, block development
officers is head of the Pahcyati raj samiti as per the government act
Panchayat samiti – functions
1) Agricultural development
2) Animal husbandry and fishery development
3) Rural health and sanitation
4) Primary education
5) Social education
6) Establishment of transport facility
7) Cooperatives and cottage industries
8) Women and community welfare
9) Conservation of forests
10) Rural housing
11) Inspection of gram panchayat and giving advises
49
Standing committees of panchayat samiti
1) Standing committee - 1 (Development)
Planning, and development of irrigation wells, animal care, fisheries, agriculture including
land conservation, cooperative sectors, savings, cottage industries, small industries, rural housing
2) Standing committee - 2 (Education)
Look after the Primary education, social education, employment education cooperation,
public health, sanitation, sewage, drainage etc.
4) Standing committee - 3 (Women & public welfare)
Welfare of backward classes, schedule cast and schedule tribe, women and child welfare,
cultural events
5) Standing committee - 4 (Works)
Roads, water supply, Irrigation except irrigation wells
6) Standing committee -5 (Taxes)
Collection of taxes & allocation of budget to the other committees,
The number of members in panchayat samiti divided in to five committees, all numbers
are members in five committees, Samiti president chairman for finance committee and vice
president chairman for Development Committee and remaining three committees’ heads elected
by committee members
Zilla parishad Zillaparishad is the last one and third one, the members of the Zillaparishad
are given below
1) Presidents of all panchayat samities of the district
2) MLAs and MPs who are members of various panchayatisamities of district
3) Two women (one from minority) and three members from backward classes who
elected in cooption method are also members, Zillaparishad chairman directly elected
by the zillaparishad members, vice president elected by the members and each
zillaparishad has executive officers on behalf of the government
The above ideals fulfilled by representatives elected by the people
Zillaparishad – Functions
1) Reviewing and approving the budget of the panchayat samiti
2) Distribution of ad hock grants to blocks
3) Implementation of plans, projects and schemes
4) Advising the government on the programmes to be implemented in the gram panchay and
panchayat samiti
50
5) Establishment and run the vocational education and industrial schools
6) Coordinating the block plans and making district plan, standing committees will be there
as in mandalparishat
Democratic Decentralisation – characteristics:
Merits Establishment of democracy at upper level
1. Establishment of democracy at two stages in implementation of community development
programmes without distinguishing between democracy at the upper level and
authoritarianism at the lower level
2. Establishing power in the hands of the people through a three - tier administration in the
district
3. People decide the developmental programmes as per their wish
4. The tailored programmes will be implemented by the elected people representative
(Leaders)
Demerits
1) Lack of cooperation as expected from the people
2) Even in three tire system of government the rich and upper cast taken up positions
3) Voting enhanced the factionists and egoism in various categories
4) Lack of coordination between various government departments intended for development
5) Most of the programmes to be implemented by the Panchayati raj are transferred to Small
Farmers’ Development Agency (SFDA), District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)
and Integrated Peoples Development Programmes at forest area
51
CHAPTER – 16
EVOLUTION OF MANDAL SYSTEM IN ANDHRA PRADESH
Introduction
The Janata government came to power at center in December 1977 an eighteen (18)
member committee was set up under the chairmanship of “Ashok meahta” as part of democratic
decentralization, Ashokmehata committee submitted final report in August 1978, the main
recommendation of this committee was the introduction of two tier panchayat raj system means at
lower level mandal parishad and at upper level zillaparishad, among these two the Mandal
parishad is important
Accordingly the government of Andhrapradesh on 25th May - 1985, abolishing talukas and
firkas in place of them on 13th January-1986 mandal parishads were introduced by the DrNTRama
Rao, The Andhra Pradesh state was the second in the country and first was Karnataka state in
introduction of mandal parishads in India
Organization set up and special characteristics
The talukas and phirkas abolished as first element in mandal system, the power of the
Thasildars is transferred to Mandal Revenue Officer (MRO), he or she look after the revenue
activities in the mandal, mandal development activities will be look after by the Mandal
Development Offices (MDO)
1128 mandals were farmed in Andhra Pradesh (539 mandals in Telangana state) each
mandal consists of 12 to 14 villages with 35,000 to 50,000 population all the villages which are
central to the panchayat samities and municipalities are considered as mandal revenue offices
Decided to setup following facilities at all the mandal headquarters Bus stand, Railway
station, Primary health center, small hospital, Animal health centre, Police station, post office,
Telephone exchange, Junior college, Market and Agricultural markets
Levels of administration in the mandal system
• Grampanchayat
• Mandal parishat
• Zilla parishat
• District development review board
The range of mandal parishat and revenue department is same, formerly gram panchayat
surpanchas elected by direct elections, panchayat samity president elected sarpanches, presidents
of panchayat samities and members of parliament together elect the zilla parishad chairman, there
was a method of passing a no confidence resolution on such public representatives
52
According to present method, mandal praja parishad, zilla parishat chairman elected by in
direct method Only after two years of elections of mandal praja parishad presidents, zillaparishad
chairman is possible to remove from the post by resolution of no confidence, during tenure of
mandal parishad president, and zilla parishad chairman only once is possible to remove them from
service according to “No-confidence motion” once the no confidence motion is defeated it is not
possible to propose a no confidence motion again the MPTC, ZPTCs elected by the people cannot
be removed by a resolution of no confidence The gram panchayat surpanch, MLAs, MPs on a
linguistic bases, minorities Two members (One from each) will be a member in Mandalparishat as
per their wish reservation system of mandal parishat presidents as follows
1) 15 per cent to schedule casts
2) 6 per cent to schedule tribes
3) 20 per cent to backward classes
4) 9 per cent to women
One cooption members will be there in zillaparishat, elected by mandal parishad
presidents, MLAs, MPs of the district-based language
The district development review board reviews various development programmes The
following are the members of district development review board
1) Mandal praja parishad presidents
2) Chairman of zilla parished
3) District MLAs
4) District collector
5) President of District cooperative bank
6) President of District cooperative marketing society
7) Chairman of District library
The Chief Minister of the state my appoint a minister to chair the District Development
Review board, the District Collector shall be the secretary of the review board
Mandal system benefits over panchayat raj system
1) Making people partners in the management and administration of programmes that benefit
to the people
2) Making involvement of schedule casts, schedule tribes and dalits in democratic
governance
3) The mandal system was set up to achieve goals such as the establishment of self-
government
53
CHAPTER – 17
EXTENSION REFORMS
(ATMA, SREP, Market-led extension)
Introduction
Most of the previous developmental programmes were decided at the upper level and
implemented at lower level, given more priority to increase food grain production, not focused on
raising income of farmers by under taking diverse programmes agricultural extension officers
have given high priority on increasing the government subsidies lack of coordination in extension
officers in various branches due to such obstacles expected results could not be achieved The
government of India and the World Bank started working together in 1991 to search for new
methods in extension to overcome the above problems
Introduced new and decentralized extension programme to develop the agriculture and
focus on allied sector of agriculture and rural employment creation, the extension reforms at
present will enable the grass root level farmers to implement whatever program they need
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA)
Agricultural Technology Management Agency (ATMA) is an important organization
working for farming community towards sustainable agricultural development in a district
An important object of ATMA
It is a focal point for integrating research and extension activities and decentralization day
to day management of the public Agricultural Technology System (ATS). It is a registered society
responsible for technology dissemination at district level
ATMA is official body that promotes technological development at the district level and it
is the organization receiving and spending of funds for the development of Agriculture and allied
sectors, ATMA participates in agreement and contracts and it meets the management cost by
supervision of line department compound accounts
54
Aims and objectives of ATMA
1) To identify locations specific needs of farming community and farming system based
agricultural development
2) To setup priorities for sustainable agricultural development
3) To draw plans for production-based system activities to be undertaken by farmers
4) To execute plans through line departments, training institutions, NGOs, farmers
organization and allied institutions
5) To coordinate efforts being made by various line departments, NGOs farmers
organizations and allied institutions to strengthen research, extension, farmers linkages in
the district and to promote collaboration and coordination between various state funded
technical departments
6) To facilitate the empowerment of farmers or products through assistance for mobilization
organization into association, cooperatives tec. for their increased participations in
planning, marketing, technology dissemination and agroprocessing etc.
7) To facilitate market intervention for value addition to farm produce
Why ATMA
The ATMA at district level would be responsible for all technology dissemination
activities at the district level it has linkage with all the departments, research organizations, non-
governmental organizations and agencies associated with agricultural development in the district
Research and extension units within the project district such as ZRS (RARS) as substations,
KVK’s and the key line departments of agriculture, Animal husbandry, Horticulture and fisheries
etc. would become constituent member of ATMA Each research – extension (R-E) unit would
retain its institutional identification and affiliation but programmes and procedures concerning
district wise the R–E activities to be implemented will be determined by ATMA Governing Board
and its management committee (MC)
STRATEGIC – RESEARCH - EXTENSION PLANNING (SREP)
In past decade, the agricultural practices have been developed with farmers participation,
based on these methods at district level the Strategic Research and Extension Plans(SREP) were
prepared, the main purpose of research and extension is to increase agricultural production, the
research and extension plans prepared by considering the needs of farmers, then only they are
acceptable by farmers As well as the plans are helpful in allocation of funds to research and
extension activities at district level Hence the strategic research and extension plans are essential
to meet the location specific needs of farmers
55
SREP: Made to suit the requirements, the SREP tailored according to development aims of
existing agriculture, environment, socio-economic situation and various government sectors, the
SRE Project especially focus on address the problems of the lower-level farmers by taking
opinion of the farming community of that area
In SREP 8 steps are included.
1) Collection information or content collection
2) Identify the agricultural and environmental conditions of the district
3) Training to agricultural extension officers
4) Collection of information in participatory method
5) Analysis and prioritization research and extension information
6) Preparation of research and extension plans of district
7) Preparation of programme plan
8) Approval of SREP
SREP
Diagnostic section Strategy
Informatio Analysis Strategy Section Activities
n
Fig No. 11. Contents of SREP
SREP - Concerns.
Future: Very useful for solving long term problem but not useful for solving shorter problems
Growth: There is no discussion on the method, broadness, momentum and time of development
Environment: There is no relation between SREP and environment
Strategy : Strategy is a matter of concern here
Integration: Integration is a matter of concern
56
Importance of SREP:
1) It creates awareness on existing agricultural situation in the district
2) It helps in bring out the problems and opportunities in systematic way in agriculture and
make them understand by farmer
3) It allows everyone involved in development to participate at different stages of
development programme
4) The development program being implemented for the farmers will help to verify and make
changes, additions for the farmers
MARKET LED EXTENSION
Indian Agriculture has achieved a lot of development in the last 50 years, annual
agricultural production increased from 51 million tons in 1990 to 200 million tons in 1999-2000
and achieved self-sufficiency, catered the adequate food for growing population, in the last 50
years, food grain production increased four times while population increased three times ie 350
million to one billion The extension system gains great importance in transfer of production
technology from research to farmers, the production was increased but there is no awareness on
remunerative market rates Small and marginal farmers are forced to sell the product at their
respective villages Increased production is not useful, why because they forced sell their produce
at cheaper rate to clear hand loans, domestic needs, hence it is necessary to create awareness on
market opportunities and good returns for their produce, to tackle the rapidly changing Indian
agricultural situation, extension systems should be
1) Agricultural extension officer must have knowledge on not only production technology but
also market information for which he or she need special training
2) In extension officer has to perform or execute various types of programmes to prove his
capability and efficiency
3) Even though extension officer has perfect knowledge about markets, under unforeseen
circumstances any change in market rates he must prove his credibility
4) In of our situations, when changes in the organization, the system itself must adapt to the
circumstances
57
Challenges:
1) Currently the extension offices are taking the results of research to farmers and problems
of farmers to research for solutions Market led extension is new method of is beyond his
workload and incomprehensible power, hence to face these challenges the extension
officers should aim to acquire knowledge and skills related to market
2) Success stories of farmers who use information technology are occasionally published, so
there is need to setup an information system to communicate information wherever is
possible, now days the internet expanded to village level all types of common messages
are available in search engines but market information is not available Hence there is need
to design website in accordance to farmers by skilled personnel The websites must give
information to farmers in various languages websites must have information on current
rates, demand The information revaluation useful to farmers when the following
information is available in on button of internet system
a. What to produce
b. How much to produce
c. When to produce
d. In which farm to sale
e. In which rate
f. Where to sale
3) There are barriers such as travel allowance, personality development and free them from
the unnecessary elements and encourage towards job satisfaction, practice recognition
4) Market intelligence data making is difficult as there are large number of branches in
markets, so the relationship between agriculture and its allied branches and market
branches will strengthens by market led extension
5) For extension and market supervision, the additional director of extension should change
as additional director of extension and marketing
58
PARADIGM SHIFT FROM PRODUCTION LED EXTENSION
TO MARKET LED EXTENSION
Aspects Production led extension Market led extension
Purpose/objective Transfer of production Helping to farmers to get optimum
Technologies returns out of the enterprise
Expected end Delivery of messages, High returns
result Adoption of package
Practices by most of Farmers
Farmers seen as progressive farmers / High Farmer as an entrepreneur
produces “Agripreneur”
Focus Production/yields seed to seed whole process as an enterprise or high
returns rupees to rupee
Technology Fixe package recommended Diverse baskets of package of
for an agro climatic zone practices suitable for local situations/
Covering very huge area farming systems
Irrespective of different
Farming situations
Extensionists Message/Training/Motivating/ Joint analysis of the issues, varied
interaction Recommendation choices for adoption
Linkages/Liaisons Research Extension Farmers Research Extension Farmers Market
Extensionists role Limit to delivery mode and Enriched with market intelligence
feed back to research system besides the TOT function
Contact with Individual Farmer interest groups, Commodity
farmers interest Groups/SHGs
Maintenance of Not much importance as the Very important as agriculture, viewed
records focus on production as an enterprise to understand the cost
benefit ratio and profit generated
Support of Emphasis on production Market intelligence Including likely
information technologies price trends, demand, current prices,
Technology market position Practices,
communication Network etc. besides
Production technologies
59
FLOW CHART OF AGRICULTURE AS AN ENTERPRISE
Rupee
Credit / investment
What to produce
Analysis of land holding for suitability of crop
Decision on how much to produce
How to produce
Post harvest technology
Value addition
Storage / transport
Where sell
When to sell
At what price to sell
Selling
Rupees
Investment
60
REFERENCES:
S. No. TITLE AND AUTHORS
1. Adivi Reddy, A. 2001. Extension Education. Sri Lakshmi Press, Bapatla.
2. Agricultural Extension by Ban AW van den.
3. Fundamentals of Agricultural extension Education by Sagar Mondal
4 Chitamber, J.B. 1997. Introductory Rural Sociology. Wiley Eastern Limited, New Delhi.
5 Vidyabhushan and Sach Dev, D.R. 1998. An Introduction to Sociology. Kitab Mahal
Agencies, Allahabad
61
