PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR
TELANGANA STATE AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
THEORY COURSE MATERIAL
COURSE NO. DA 101
PRINCIPLES OF AGRONOMY
4(3+1)
by
DR. A. MADHAVI LATA
PRINCIPAL, AGRICULTURAL POLYTECHNIC, MALTHUMMEDA
NARENDER JANNU
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, APT, JAMMIKUNTA
G.SWATHI
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR, APT, KAMPASAGAR
1
LECTURE OUTLINES
S.No . Title of the lecture
1 Definition of Agriculture, Meaning and Scope of Agronomy, National and International
research institutes
2 Research stations at PJTSAU and their researchable items/Crops
3 Different Agro climatic zones of Telangana state
4 Agricultural Meteorology – Introduction - Definitions of Meteorology,
Climatology and Agricultural Meteorology – Different layers of atmosphere –
Climate and atmosphere
5 Elements of climate- Solar radiation, , functions of light, Light intensity, Quality of light
and day length, measurement of sunlight
6 Air Temperature – Introduction –Factors effecting the Air Temperature-
Measurement of Air temperature
7. Thermometers – Maximum Thermometer- Minimum Thermometer – Heat
injury – Cold injury
8. Atmospheric Pressure - Effect of atmospheric pressure on crops-Wind waves
– Wind Direction- Wind velocity- Effect of wind on crops- Robinson cup
anemometer
9. Atmospheric humidity and its expression – Wet and Dry bulb thermometers -
Effect of Humidity on Crops
10. Evaporation- Effect of evaporation on Crops- USWB open pan evaporimeter
11. Rainfall- Precipitation- Fog- Types of Rainfall- Measurement of rainfall-
Monsoons-Effect of rainfall on Crops
12 &13 Weather Disaster Management- Rainfall, Heat and Cold Waves, Windstorms,
Thunder Storms And Dust Storms, Tornados, Defective insolation
14. Weather Forecasting
15. Tillage and tilth- Primary tillage- Secondary tillage
16. Puddling- advantages of puddling- Types of tillage
17. Sowing and methods of sowing
18. Plant density – Factors effecting the plant density-planting methods
19. Soil fertility and Soil Productivity – Fertility losses
2
20. Maintenance of Soil fertility- Soil organic matter- Soil amendments-Bio
fertilizers
21. Definition of Weed – influence of weeds on crop yields- Losses and uses of weeds
22. Different methods of weed control
23. Classification of weedicides/Herbicides
24. Integrated weed management
25. Irrigation management- Definition of irrigation
26. Critical stages for irrigation in different crops -Water requirement of different crops
27 Different irrigation methods
28 Sprinkler irrigation- advantages – disadvantages
29. Drip irrigation- advantages – disadvantages
30. Drainage- -Importance of drainage- Advantages of drainage
31. Harvesting – Harvesting indices for different crops- types of harvesting-Threshing-
winnowing- drying- storage
32. Dryland Agriculture- Introduction- Types
33. Problems in Dryland Agriculture
34-35 Control measures taken for retaining of soil moisture in Dryland Agriculture
36. Water harvesting – Definition- Types- Runoff farming
37. Contingency crop planning
38-39 Watershed- Definition- Basic information-Principles in watershed management- Different
objectives & classes of watershed management
40. Cropping systems – Definition – Types- Mono cropping – Intercropping - Mixed
Cropping – Relay Cropping – Sequence Cropping – Multiple cropping – Mixed
cropping- Multistoried Cropping.
41. Crop rotation- Principles- Advantages
42. Integrated farming system (IFS)- Definition and advantages
3
43. Types of integrated farming systems (IFS)
44. Sustainable Agriculture
45. Organic farming – Scope- Management – Advantages
46. Certification of organic farming products
47-48 National project on organic farming
Lecture No.1
Definition of Agriculture, Meaning and Scope of Agronomy, National and
International research institutes
The term agriculture is derived from the Latin words “ager”or“agri”
meaning “soil” and ‘cultra’ meaning ‘cultivation’
Agriculture is a very broad term encompassing all aspects of crop
production, livestock farming, fisheries, forestry etc.
Agriculture may be defined as the art, the science and the business of
producing crops and livestock for man’s use and employment.
Agriculture is the cultivation of lands for production of crops for a
regular supply of food and other needs for progress of the nation.
Agriculture is influenced by a large number of factors, some of which
can be controlled by man (soil and irrigation) which others are beyond the
control (climate)
The term “Agronomy” is derived from Greek words “Agros” meaning
“field” and “nomos” meaning “to manage”
Agronomy is a branch of agricultural science which deals with
principles and practices of soil, water and crop management.
Agronomy deals with methods which provide favourable environment
to the crop for higher productivity.
Scope of Agronomy
Agronomy is a dynamic discipline with the advancement of knowledge
and better understanding of plant and environment, agricultural practices are
modified and new practices developed for high productivity, for example
availability of chemical fertilizer has necessitated the generation of knowledge
on the method, quantity and time of application of fertilizers. Similarly
availability of herbicides for the control of weeds has led to the development
of knowledge about selectivity, time and method of application of herbicides.
To overcome the problems different management practices are developed.
Population pressure is increasing but area under cultivation is static,
therefore more number of crops have to be grown on the same piece of land to
4
increase the yield. As a result, intensive cropping has come into practice.
New technology has to be developed to overcome the effect of moisture
stress under dryland conditions. As new varieties of crops with high yield
potential become available package of practices have to be developed to
exploit their full potential.
Restoration of soil fertility, preparation of good seed bed, use of proper
seed rates, correct dates of sowing for each improved variety, proper
conservation and management of soil moisture and proper control of weeds
are agronomic practices to make our limited land and water resources more
productive.
Relation of Agronomy to other sciences
Agronomy is a synthesis of several disciplines like soil science,
Agricultural chemistry, crop physiology, plant ecology, biochemistry and
economics. Soil physical, chemical and biological properties have to be
understood thoroughly to effect modification of soil environment. Similarly it
is necessary to understand the physiology of crops to meet their requirements.
Advances in economic analysis helped in production of crops economically.
Agronomist aims to obtain maximum production at minimum cost. He
exploits the knowledge developed by basic and applied science for higher crop
production. Whatever may be the research findings of other scientists.
Agronomist has to test their suitability in the field and accept them finally and
also judge the reactions of farming community. He is a key person with
working knowledge of all agricultural disciplines and coordinator of different
subject matter specialists.
5
NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH INSTITUTES
CAZRI : Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
CFTRI : Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore, Karnataka
CICR : Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur, Maharashtra
CPRI : Central Potato Research Institute, Simla, H.P.
CRIJAF :Central Research Institute for Jute and Allied Fibres,
BarrackPore, W.B.
CIAE : Central Institute of Agriculture Engineering, Bhopal, M.P.
CPCRI : Central Plantation crops Research Institute, Kasargod, Kerala
CRIDA :Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture, Hyderabad,
Telangana
CRRI : Central Rice Research Institute, Cuttack, Orissa
CSWCRTI : Central Soil and Water Conservation Research and Training
Institute, Dehradun, U.P.
CTCRI : Central Tuber Crops Research Institute, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
CSSRI :Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal,
Haryana
CTRI : Central Tobacco Research Institute, Rajahmundry,
A.P.
IIOR : Indian Institute of Oilseeds Research, Hyderabad,
Telangana
IIRR : Indian Institute of Rice Research, Hyderabad,
Telangana
DWR : Directorate of Wheat Research, Karnal, Haryana
DWMR : Directorate of Water Management Research Institute, Jhansi, U.P.
FRI : Forest Research Institute, Dehradun, U.P.
IARI : Indian Agriculture Research Institute, Pusa, New Delhi
IGFARI : Indian Grassland Fodder and Agroforestry Research Institute, Jhansi,
U. P.
IISR : Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, Lucknow, U.P.
IISS : Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal, M.P.
IIPR : Indian Institute of Pulse Research, Kanpur, U.P.
IIHR : Indian Institute of Horticultural Research, Bangalore, Karnataka.
ILRI : Indian Lac Research Institute, Ranchi, Bihar
JTRL : Jute Technological Research Laboratory, Kolkata, W.B.
6
NCMRT : National Centre for Mushroom Research and Training, Solan, H.P.
NRCG : National Research Centre for Groundnut, Junagadh, Gujarat
IIMR : Indian Institute of Millets Reaearch, Hyderabad,
Telangana
IISR :Indian Institute of Soybean Research, Indore, M.P.
IISR :Indian Institute of Spices
Research, Calicut, Kerala
DRC :Directorate of Cashew
Research, Puttur, Karnataka
CCRI : Central Citrus Research
Institute,Nagpur, Maharashtra
DRMR :Directorate of Rapeseed Mustard Research, Bharatpur, Rajasthan
IIOPR :Indian Instituteof Oil Palm Research, Pedavegi, Andhra Pradesh.
NRCWS : National Research Centre for Weed Science, Jabalpur,M.P.
NBPGR : National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi
NAARM : National Academy of Agricultural Research Management, Hyderabad
NBSSLUP : National Bureau of Soil Survey and Land Use Planning,
Nagpur, Maharashtra
NPPTI : National Plant Protection Training Institute, Hyderabad,
Telangana
PDCSR: Project Directorate for Cropping Systems Research, Meerut,
U.P.
SBI : Sugarcane Breeding Institute, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
IBPGR : International Board for Plant Genetic Resources, Rome, Italy
ICARDA: International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry
Areas, Aleppo, Syria
ICRAF : International Centre for Research in Agro-Forestry, Nairobi, Kenya
ICRISAT :International Crops Research Institute for Semi-Arid
Tropics, Hyderabad, India
WARDA : West Africa Rice Development Association, Ivory Coast, West Africa
IMPORTANT EVENTS OF AGRICULTURE IN INDIA
1788 First attempt at cotton crop improvement in Bombay
province
1827 First agricultural society at Calcutta
1864 First model agricultural farm at Saidapet, Tamil Nadu
1871 Department of Agriculture was created
7
1878 Higher Education in Agriculture at Coimbatore
1880 First Report of Famine Commission (Famine during
1876-77)
1893 Second report of Famine Commission
1901 Third report of Famine Commission
1901 First Irrigation Commission
1902 Introduction of large scale cultivation of groundnut
1903 Imperial Agricultural research Institute at Pusa, Bihar
1904 Introduction of Cambodia cotton
1912 Imperial Sugarcane Breeding Station at Coimbatore
1926 Royal Commission on Agriculture
1929 Imperial (Indian) Council of Agricultural Research at
Delhi
1936 IARI shifted to Delhi
1942 Grow More Food Campaign
1946 Central Rice Research Institute
1947 Fertilisers and Chemicals, Travancore
1956 Project for Intensification of Regional Research on Oilseeds
Cotton, Millets (PIRRCOM)
1960 Intensive Agriculture District Programme (IADP)
1963 National Seed Corporation
1965 Intensive Agriculture Area Programme (IIAP)
1965 National Demonstration Programme
1965 All India Coordinated Rice Improvement Project,
Hyderabad
1966 HYV Programme
1966 Multiple Cropping Schemes
1970 Drought Prone Area Programme
1971 All India Coordinated Project for Dryland Agriculture
1972 ICRISAT
1973 Minikit Trails Programme
1974 Command Area Development
1975 Release of first cotton hybrid in India
1976 Report of National Commission on
Agriculture
1976 :Integrated Rural Development Programme
(IRDP)
1977 Training and Visit (T&V)System
8
1979 National Agriculture Research Project (NARP)
1982 National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD)
1986 Establishment of Technology mission on oilseeds
1993 Release of First rice hybrid in India
1998 :National Agricultural Technology Project
(NATP)
ITDA - Integrated Tribal Development Agency
SFDA - Small Farmers Development Agency
HADP: Hill Area Development Project Special Programme for
Horticultural Crops
DRDA - District Rural Development Agency
Functions of ICAR: Coordinating Agricultural activity between states and
centre, financing research problems.
Maintaining National Research Centres and Institutes
Lecture No. 2
Research stations at PJTSAU and their researchable items/Crops
Telangana State is apportioned into three agro-climatic zones based on the geographical
characteristics such as rainfall, temperature, nature of soils etc. As a result of bifurcation of state
of Andhra Pradesh in the year 2014, Professor Jayashankar Telangana State Agricultural
University (PJTSAU) was established and it includes the different research stations at different
locations.
S. Researchable
Agro-climatic zones and Research stations
No items/Crops
I. Research Stations in the Northern Telangana Zone
Rice, Sesame,
Regional Agricultural Research Station, Polasa, Jagtial 505 529 Water
1.
Dist: Jagtial management,
Cropping systems
Agricultural Research Station, Karimnagar 505002 Maize, Seed
2.
Dist:Karimnagar, production
Agricultural Research Station, Kunaram - 505 174 Dist: Peddapalli-
3. Rice
505172
9
Sugarcane, Rice,
Cropping systems
Regional Sugarcane and Rice Research Station, Rudrur 503 188
4. for Nizamsagar
Dist: Nizamabad
area, Seed
Production
Cotton, Jowar,
5. Agricultural Research Station, Adilabad 504 002 Dist: Adilabad rainfed rice,
Soybean
6. Agricultural Research Station, Mudhole 504 102 Dist: Nirmal, Desi cotton
II. Research Stations in the Central Telangana Zone
Rice, Pulses,
Regional Agricultural Research Station, Warangal-506 007 Dist:
1. Cotton, Water
Warangal
management
Pulses,
2. Agricultural Research Station, Madhira-507 203 Dist: Khammam Maghijowar, Seed
production
Agricultural Research Station Basanthpur - 502 249, Mamidigi,
3. Sugarcane, Wheat
NyalkalMandal, Dist: Medak
Cereals, Millets,
Agricultural Research Station, Nathnaipally, Narsapur - 502 313
4. Pulses and
Dist: Medak
Oilseeds
Maize, Jowar,
5. Agricultural Research Station, Tornala, Dist: Siddipeta
Pulses
III. Research Stations in the Southern Telangana Zone
Sorghum, Bajra,
Castor,
1. Regional Agricultural Research Station, Palem 509 215
Horsegram,
Fodder crops
Maintenance of
Agricultural Research Institute, Rajendranagar 500 030 Dist: Campus, Rice
2.
Rangareddy based cropping
systems
Rice , Organic
Rice Research Centre, ARI, Rajendranagar, 500 030 Dist:
3. farming, Seed
Rangareddy
Production
10
Testing &
Farm Implements and Machinery Scheme, ARI, Rajendranagar,500
4. development of
030 Dist: Rangareddy
farm implements
Soil fertility, Soil
plant
Radio Tracer Laboratory, ARI, Rajendranagar, 500 030 Dist: relationships, Use
5.
Rangareddy, of Radioactive
Isotopes in
Agriculture
Soil test based
balanced fertilizer
AICRP for investigation on Soil Test Crop Response Correlation,
6. recommendations
ARI, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030
for different
agricultural crops
Micro and
AICRP on Micro and Secondary Nutrients and Pollutant elements in
7. secondary
Soils and Plants, ARI, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad- 500 030
nutrients in soil
Forage Crops like
AICRP on Forage Crops and Utilization, ARI, Rajendranagar Bajra, Cowpea
8.
Hyderabad 500 030 and Grasses. Seed
Production
AICRP on Biological Control , ARI, Rajendranagar Hyderabad - Biological Control
9.
500 030 of Crop Pests
Characterization
of Agricultural
climate to
Agro Climate Research Centre, ARI, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad-
10. determine Crop
500 030
growing season,
Weather
forecasting
Birds and
vertebrate pest
AINP on Vertebrate Pest Management, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad -
11. damage and
500 030
prevention in
Agril. Crops
AINP on Pesticide Residues, EEI Premises Pesticide Residues
12.
Rajendranagar,Hyderabad - 500 030 Analysis
11
Testing Raw
Food, Vegetable,
Quality Control Lab, EEI campus Rajendranagar , Hyderabad - 500
13. Fruit, Herbal And
030
Finished Food
Product Samples
Seed Research and Technology Centre, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - Seed Research and
14.
500 030 Seed Technology
Collection,
Screening and
15. AICRP on Agro-Forestry, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030 Selection of Trees
and Bushes for
Agro-forestry
Water
Water Technology Centre, Diamond Jubilee Block ,Rajendranagar
16. Management
Hyderabad - 500 030
Research
Weed
AICRP on Weed Management Diamond Jubilee Block,
17. management in
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030
Agricultural Crops
AICRP on Integrated Farming Systems, Diamond Jubilee Block Cropping Systems
18.
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad 500 030 Research
Improvement of
Agricultural Crops
19. Institute of Biotechnology Rajendranagar, Hyderabad 500 030 through Molecular
Breeding
Approaches
Mushroom
Mushroom Cultivation Scheme, Dept. of Plant Pathology, College
20. Production
of Agriculture, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030
Technologies
Cost of
Cost of Cultivation Scheme, College of Agriculture, Rajendranagar, Cultivation of
21.
Hyderabad - 500 030 Principal Crops in
the State
Foods and
Nutrition, Child
AICRP on Home Science, Post Graduate Research Centre,
22. Development,
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030
Clothing and
Textiles, Family
Resource
12
Management,
Home Science
Extension
Maize, Maize
based Cropping
23. Maize Research Centre ARI, Rajendranagar, Hyderabad - 500 030
Systems, Fodder
Maize
Safflower, Rabi
24. Agricultural Research Station,Tandur - 501 141 Dist: Vikarabad Sorghum,
Redgram
Agricultural Research Station Kampasagar, Babusaipeta Post, Rice, Maize,
25.
TripuraramMandal, Dist: Nalgonda Farming Systems
13
Lecture No. 3
Different Agro climatic zones of Telangana state
Telangana is divided into three agro- climatic zones
I. Northern Telangana Zone
This zone has a total geographical area of 7.43 m. ha. covering the districts of Adilabad,
Karimnagar and Nizamabad. The climate is typically tropical rainy. The mean annual precipitation
ranges from 900 to 1150 mm with 82 per cent of rainfall from south west monsoon. The net sown
area is 2.21 m. ha. of which 0.67 m. ha. is irrigated representing 30.3 per cent of the net sown area.
The major crops grown in the zone are rice, sugarcane, jowar, pulses, maize, cotton, groundnut,
turmeric and chillies. Cropping intensity is 110 per cent. Wells are the main source of irrigation
followed by canals. Red chalka soils are predominant.
II. Southern Telangana Zone
The zone comprises of the districts of Rangareddy, Mahabubnagar (except the southern border),
Nalgonda (except south east border), north western part of Warangal and southern part of Medak
districts. The zone covers an area of 4.0 m. ha. The soils of the zone are mainly red sandy, red
earths and medium black soils. The zone receives an annual normal rainfall of 809 (700—900)
mm. About 77 percent of total rainfall is received during south west monsoon only. 14.35 per cent
of the 1.68 m. ha. of net sown area is under irrigation. The principal crops grown in the zone are
jowar, castor, rice, groundnut, bajra, redgram, horsegram, ragi, greengram, maize and sesamum.
III. Central Telangana Zone
The zone comprises of the districts of Medak, Warangal and Khammam. The zone covers an area
of 3.86 m. ha. The soils of the zone are mainly red sandy loams, very red soils and deep black
soils. The zone receives an annual normal rainfall of 996 (868—1124) mm. About 88.03 per cent
of total rainfall is received during south west monsoon only. The net sown area is l.25 m. ha. of
which 0.51 m. ha. is irrigated representing 40.68 per cent of the net sown area. The principal crops
grown in the zone are Paddy, Cotton, Red gram, Maize, Sugarcane, Black gram and Green gram.
It is the important Cotton growing zone of Telangana Cropping intensity is 110%. Wells are the
main source of irrigation followed by canals. Red chalka soils are predominant.
14
Lecture No. 4
Agricultural Meteorology – Introduction - Definitions of Meteorology,
Climatology and Agricultural Meteorology – Different layers of atmosphere
– Climate and atmosphere
Atmosphere
The earth is elliptical in shape. It has three spheres. They are:
1 Hydrosphere: the water portion.
2 Lithosphere: the solid portion.
3 Atmosphere: the gaseous portion.
The atmosphere is defined as “The colourless, odourless and tasteless
physical mixture of gases which surrounds the earthon all sides”.It is mobile,
compressible and expansible.
Uses of atmosphere for agriculture: The uses of atmosphere are: It
1. Provides oxygen which is useful for respiration in crops.
2. Provides carbon-dioxide to build biomass in photosynthesis.
3. Provides nitrogen which is essential for plant growth.
4. Acts as a medium for transportation of pollen.
5. Protects crop plants on earth from harmful U.V. rays.
6. Maintains warmth to plant life.
7. Provides rain to field crops as it is a source of water vapour, clouds etc.
Agricultural Meteorology
Meteorology
Meteorology is defined as
 "The science of atmosphere".
 “A branch of physics of the earth dealing with physical processes in the
atmosphere that produce weather”.
15
Climatology
It is defined as “The science dealing with the factors which determine
and control the distribution of climate over the earth's surface”. Different
factors affecting the climate of a region are:
1. Latitude 5. Low and high pressure belts.
2. Altitude 6. Mountain barriers.
3. Land and water. 7. Ocean currents.
4. Winds and airmasses 8. Extent of forests,
etc. The above factors are also known as “climatic
elements”
Agricultural Meteorology
Agriculture is defined as “The art and science of production and
processing of plant and animal life for the use of human beings”. It is also
defined as “A system for harvesting or exploiting the solar radiation”.
Agriculture deals with three most complex entities viz., soil, plant and
atmosphere and their interactions. Among these three, atmosphere is the most
complex entity over the other two. It is defined as
• "The study of those aspects of meteorology that have direct relevance to
agriculture". It is also defined as
• “A branch of applied meteorology which investigates the responses of
crops to the physical conditions of the environment”.
• “An applied science which deals with the relationship between
weather/climatic conditions and agricultural production”.
• “A science concerned with the application of meteorology to the
measurement and analysis of the physical environment in agricultural
systems”.
• The word `Agrometeorology’ is the abbreviated form of agricultural
meteorology.
Practical Utility / Importance / Economic Benefits / Significance of Study of
Agricultural Meteorology:
In a broad manner the study of agricultural meteorology helps in
1. Planning cropping systems /patterns.
2. Selection of sowing dates for optimum crop yields.
3. Cost effective ploughing, harrowing, weeding etc.
4. Reducing losses of applied chemicals and fertilizers.
5. Judicious irrigation to crops.
16
6. Efficient harvesting of all crops.
7. Reducing or eliminating outbreak of pests and diseases.
8. Efficient management of soils which are formed out of weather action.
9. Managing weather abnormalities like cyclones, heavy rainfall, floods,
drought etc. This can be achieved by;
• Protection: When rain is forecast avoid irrigation. But, when
frost is forecast apply irrigation.
• Avoidance: Avoid fertilizer and chemical sprays when rain is
forecast.
c. Mitigation: Use shelterbelts against cold and heatwaves.
10. Effective environmental protection.
11. Avoiding or minimising losses due to forest fires.
Scope of agricultural meteorology
In addition to the points mentioned above, the influence of weather on
agriculture can be on a wide range of scales in space and time. This is
reflected in the scope of agricultural meteorology as detailed below:
1. At the smallest scale, the subject involves the study of microscale
processes taking place within the layers of air adjacent to leaves of
crops, soil surfaces, etc. The agrometeorologists have to study the
structure of leaf canopies which effects the capture of light and how the
atmospheric carbon dioxide may be used to determine rates of crop
growth.
2. On a broader scale, agrometeorologists have to use the standard
weather records to analyse and predict responses of plants.
3. Although the subject implies a primary concern with atmospheric
processes the agrometeorologistis also are interested in the soil
environment because of the large influence which the weather can have
on soil temperature and on the availability of water and nutrients to
plant roots.
4. The agrometeorologist also is concerned with the study of glass houses
and other protected environments designed for improving agricultural
production.
17
Physical structure of the atmosphere
On the basis of vertical temperature variation, the atmosphere is divided into
different spheres or layers as detailed below:
I Troposphere
1. The word “Tropo” means mixing or turbulence and “Sphere” means region.
2. The average height of this lower most layer of the atmosphere is about 14 kilometers above
the mean sea level; at the equator it is 16 kilometers; and 7- 8 kilometers at the poles.
3. Under normal conditions the height of the troposphere changes from place to place and
season to season.
4. Various types of clouds, thunderstorms, cyclones and anticyclones occur in this sphere
because of the concentration of almost all the water vapour and aerosols in it. So, this layer
is called as “Seat of weather phenomena”.
5. The wind velocities increase with height and attain the maximum at the top of this layer.
6. Another striking feature of troposphere is that there is a decrease of temperature with
increasing elevation at a mean lapse rate of about 6.5o C per kilometer or 3.6oF per 1,000
feet.
7. Most of the radiation received from the sun is absorbed by the earth's surface. So the
troposphere is heated from below.
8. In this layer, about 75 per cent of total gases and most of the moisture and dust particles
are present.
9. At the top of the troposphere there is a shallow layer separating it from stratosphere which
is known as “Tropopause”.
10. The tropopause layer is thin and its height changes according to the latitudes and infact this
is a transitional zone and distinctly characterised by no major movement of air.
18
II Stratosphere
1. This layer exists above the tropopause (around 20 km onwards) and extends to altitudes of
about 50-55 kilometers.
2. This layer is called as "Seat of photochemical reactions".
3. In any particular locality, the temperature remains practically constant at around 20
kilometers and is characterised as Isothermal because the air is thin, clear, cold and dry.
4. The temperature of this layer increases with height and also depends upon troposphere
because troposphere is higher at equator than at poles.
5. In the upper parts of the stratosphere the temperatures are almost as higher as those near
the earth's surface, which is due to the fact that the ultra violet radiation from the sun is
absorbed by ozone in this region.
6. Less convection takes place in the stratosphere because it is warm at the top and cold at the
bottom.
7. There is also persistence of circulation patterns and high wind speeds.
8. The upper boundary of the stratosphere is called stratopause and above this level there is a
steep rise in temperature.
III. Mesosphere / Ozonosphere
1. There is a maximum concentration of ozone between 30 and 60 km above the surface of
the earth and this layer is known as ozonosphere.
2. A property of ozone is that it absorbs ultra violet rays. Had there been no layer of ozone in
the atmosphere, the ultra violet rays would have reached the surface of the earth and no life
on it.
3. The temperature of the ozonosphere is high (warm) due to selective absorption of ultra
violet radiation by ozone.
4. Because of the preponderance of chemical process this sphere is called as "Chemosphere".
5. In this layer the temperature increases with height at the rate of 5oC per each kilometer.
6. According to some leading scientists the ionosphere is supposed to start at a height of 80
kilometers above the earth's surface. The layer between 50 and 80 kilometers is called
Mesosphere. In this layer the temperature decreases with height. The upper boundary of
this layer is called the mesopause.
19
IV. Ionosphere/Thermosphere
1. Ionosphere layer lies beyond ozonosphere (mesosphere) at a height of about 80 kms. above
the earths surface and extends upto 400 kilometers.
2. The atmosphere in ionosphere is partly ionised. Enriched ion zones exist in the form of
distinct ionised layers. So, this layer is called as ionosphere.
3. Above the ozonosphere the temperature falls again. According to some climatologists, the
layer between 80 and 140 kilometers is known as “Thermosphere”.
4. The ionosphere reflects radio waves because of one or multiple reflections of short wave
radio beams from the ionised shells. So, long distance radio communication is possible due
to this layer.
V. Exosphere
1. The outer most layer of the earth's atmosphere is named as exosphere and this layer lies
between 400 and 1,000 kilometres.
2. At such a greater height the density of atoms in the atmosphere is extremely low.
3. Hydrogen and Helium gases predominate in this outer most region.
4. At an altitude of about 500 to 600 kilometres the density of the atmosphere becomes so
low that collisions between neutral particles become extremely rare.
Principal gases comprising dry air in the lower atmosphere
Sl. No. Constituent Per cent by volume Per cent by weight
1 Nitrogen 78.09 75.53
2 Oxygen 20.95 23.13
3 Argon 0.93 1.28
4 Carbon-dioxide 0.03 0.06
20
Differences between Weather and Climate.
S. No. Weather Climate
1 A typical physical condition of the Generalised condition of the
atmosphere atmosphere which represents and
describesthecharacteristicsofaregion
2 Changes from place to place even in Different in different large regions
a small locality
3 Changes according to time (every Change requires longer (years) time
moment)
4 Similar numerical values of weather Similar numerical values of climate of
ofdifferentplacesusuallyhavesame different places usually have different
weather climates
5 Crop growth, development and yield Selection of crops suitable for a place
are decided by weather in a given is decided based on climate of the
season region
6 Under aberrant weather conditions Helps in long-term agricultural
planners can adopt a short-term planning
contingent planning
Lecture No.5
Elements of climate- Solar radiation, functions of light, Light intensity, Quality
of light and day length, measurement of sunlight
Elements of Climate:
1. Solar Radiation
2. Air Temperature
3. Atmospheric Pressure
4. Wind
5. Relative Humidity
6. Evaporation
7. Rainfall
Solar Radiation:
Radiant energy is transmitted in the form of electromagnetic waves by the sun is known as
“solar radiation”. Each day the earth receives energy in the form of incoming solar radiation from
the sun. This insolation is absorbed by the earth’s surface and is converted to heat (long wave
radiation).
21
When the soil temperature increases – heat energy reflected from soil surface in to climate
it is known as “Terrestrial Radiation” due to this air lower layers near to surface soil get heated
and transmitted in to upper layers. Of the total solar radiation, some amount will be absorbed and
reflected back like given below:
Heat energy is transmitted by three processes.
1 Radiation
 This is the process of transmission of energy from one body to another
without the aid of a material medium (solid, liquid or gas).
Example: The energy transmission through space from the sun to the earth.
2 Conduction
 This is the process of heat transfer through matter without the actual
movement of molecules of the substances or matter. Heat flows from the
warmer to cooler part of the body so that the temperature between them are
equalised.
Example: The energy transmission through an iron rod which is made
warmer at one end.
3 Convection
 This is the process of transmission of heat through actual movement of
molecules of the medium. This is the predominant form of transmission of
energy on the earth as all the weather related processes involve this
process.
Example: Boiling of water in a beaker
Of the above three processes of transmission of energy, convection is the
predominant form of transmission of energy on the earth. All the weather
related processes involve this process.
22
Functions of light: The functions of light are:
1. All the plant parts are directly or indirectly influenced by light
2. Light of correct intensity, quality and duration is essential to normal
plant development
3. Poor light availability causes abnormalities and disorders in plants
4. Light is indispensable to photosynthesis
5. Light governs the distribution of photosynthates among different organs
of plants
6. Effects tiller production
7. Effects stability, strength and length of culms
8. Effects dry matter production
9. Effects the size of the leaves
10. Effects the root development
11. Effects the flowering and fruiting
12. Effects the dormancy of the seed
Absorbed solar radiation Reflected solar radiation
1. Water vapor, clouds, dust particles in the 1. Reflected by clouds (-23%)
air (+19%) 2. By dust particles in the air (-9%)
2. Absorbed by earth (+27%) 3. Reflected by surface soil (-2%)
3. Absorbed by environment (+20%)
Total absorbed solar radiation (+66%) Reflected solar radiation (-34%)
23
Light dimensions:
1. Light intensity
2. Light quality
3. Day length
1. Light intensity:
• Light intensity varies with the fluctuation in temperature, relative humidity.
• Only 1% light is utilised in photosynthesis and is converted to chemical energy.
• Less light intensity – reduces the photosynthesis rate, closes the leaf stomata,
hence plant growth is reduced
• High light intensity- increases the respiration rate.
✓ Interrupts the photosynthesis and respiration.
✓ Water losses, due to high light intensity the stomata close, where in
sufficient Co will not enter the stomata and reduces the photosynthesis
2
rate.
✓ Plant cells oxidise in environment leading to light oxidization or
solarisation.
✓ Some plants like paddy, sorghum, bajra will produce high dry matter.
2. Quality of light:
- The shorter wave lengths of the spectrum are known as U.V. rays. These are
chemically very active. Unless these are filtered in the atmosphere, there is a
danger for life on the earth. This band ranges between 0.005 to 0.4 microns.
- The part of the spectrum which is visible known as `light'. It is the part of the
spectrum which is essential for all the plant processes and ranges from 0.4 to
0.7 microns.
- The third part of the solar spectrum (last band) is known infra-red band. This
is essential for thermal energy of the plant (the source of heat to the plant).
This band is less than 0.7 microns.
24
3. Day length/ Photoperiodism:
• Day length, or length of day, or length of daytime, is the time each day from the
moment the upper limb of the sun's disk appears above the horizon during sunrise
to the moment when the upper limb disappears below the horizon during sunset.
OR
Photoperiodism is the physiological reaction of organisms to the length of night or
a dark period. It occurs in plants and animals. Photoperiodism can also be defined
as the developmental responses of plants to the relative lengths of light and dark
periods. They are classified under three groups according to the Photoperiodism:
short-day plants, long-day plants, and day-neutral plants.
a. Long-day plants: flower when the night length falls below their critical photoperiod.
These plants typically flower during late spring or early summer as days are getting longer.
Some long-day obligate plants are:
• Carnation (Dianthus)
• Henbane (Hyoscyamus)
• Oat (Avena)
b. Short-day plants: flower when the night length exceeds their critical photoperiod. They
cannot flower under short nights; they require a continuous period of darkness before floral
development can begin. Natural nighttime light, such as moonlight or lightning, is not of
sufficient brightness or duration to interrupt flowering.
In general, short-day (i.e.long-night) plants flower as days grow shorter.
Photoperiodism affects flowering by inducing the shoot to produce floral buds instead of leaves
and lateral buds.
25
Some short-day facultative plants are:
• Kenaf ( Hibiscus cannabinus)
• Marijuana (Cannabis)
• Cotton (Gossypium)
• Rice (Oryza)
• Jowar (Sorghum bicolor)
• Green Gram (Mung bean, Vigna radiata)
• Soybeans (Glycine max)
c. Day-neutral plants: Day neutral plants such as cucumber, roses, tomatoes, do not initiate
flowering based on photoperiodism. Instead, they may initiate flowering after attaining a
certain overall developmental stage or age, or in response to alternative environmental
stimuli, such as vernalisation (a period of low temperature).
Measurement of Sunlight:
The Campbell–Stokes recorder (sometimes called a Stokes sphere) is a type of sunshine recorder.
It was invented by John Francis Campbell in 1853 and modified in 1879 by Sir George Gabriel
Stokes. The original design by Campbell consisted of a glass sphere set into a wooden bowl with
the sun burning a trace on the bowl. Stokes's refinement was to make the housing out of metal and
to have a card holder set behind the sphere. The unit is designed to record the hours of bright
sunshine which will burn a hole through the card.
Campbell sunshine recorder
26
Lecture No.6
Air Temperature – Introduction –Factors effecting the Air Temperature-
Measurement of Air temperature
Temperature Distribution
1. Each day the earth receives energy in the form of incoming solar radiation from the sun.
2. This short wave solar radiation ranges mostly from ultra-violet (0.2 μm wavelength) to the
near infrared (3.0 microns wavelength), but reaches its maximum at around 0.5 microns
wavelength (Blue-green visible light).
3. This insolation is absorbed by the earth’s surface and is converted to heat (long wave
radiation)
4. The earth’s (terrestrial) long wave radiation reaches its peak intensity at 10 microns
wavelength (thermal infrared) and is responsible for heating the lower atmosphere.
Factors influencing temperature:
1. Latitude
2. Altitude
3. Wind flow
4. Ocean currents
5. Clouds,Rainfall
6. Mountain barriers
7. Other climatic factors.
Latitude
The effectiveness of insolation in heating the earth’s surface is largely determined by the
latitude. So, there is a general decrease in temperatures from the equator to poles, which is
a classical example of horizontal temperature distribution.
On maps, the horizontal distribution of temperature is shown by isotherms. The isotherms
are imaginary lines drawn the connecting points that have equal temperature.
Altitude:
The most common atmospheric adiabatic phenomena are those involving the change of air
temperature due to change of pressure. When pressure is increased, the work done in the
air mass appears as heat, causing its temperature to rise.
The rates of adiabatic heating and cooling in the atmosphere are described as lapse rates
and are expressed as the change of temperature with height. The adiabatic lapse rate for
dry air is very nearly 1oC per 100 m. If condensation occurs in the air parcel, latent heat is
released, thereby modifying the rate of temperature change. This is known as wet adiabatic
lapse rate
However, the average adiabatic lapse rate is 6.5oC per kilometre and it is assumed as 0.5oc
per 100 m. Large scale atmospheric motions are approximately adiabatic and clouds and
27
snow or rain associated with them are primarily adiabatic phenomena in that they result
from cooling of air associated with decreasing pressure of upward air motion.
Wind velocity:
If vapour is present in the air, air temperatures will vary based on wind velocity. If vapor is
present in air, if wind velocity is less the air temperature is less, if air is dry, wind velocity is high
the air temperature will be high.
Ocean currents:
Transport of ocean water in the form of currents carries heat from one part of the earth to
another which results in less air temperature.
Clouds, rainfall:
When heavy clouds are thererains occur and earth will not get heated with solar radiation,
hence air temperature will be less.
Mountain barrier:
Mountain ranges tend to guide the movement of cold air masses resulting in horizontal
temperature variation. Ex: Himalayas protect India from polar air.
Other climatic factors:
Air temperatures will be high, due to high CO content in industrial area (Green house
2
effect).
Inversion:
Temperature inversion, a reversal of the normal behaviour of temperature in the
troposphere (the region of the atmosphere nearest the Earth's surface), in which a layer of
cool air at the surface is overlaid by a layer of warmer air. (Under normal conditions air
temperature usually decreases with height.)
The minimum, maximum (above which crop growth ceases) and optimum temperature of
individual’s plant is called as cardinal temperature.
Crops Minimum Optimum Maximum
temperature ºC temperature ºC temperature ºC
Rice 10 32 36-38
wheat 4.5 20 30-32
Maize 8-10 20 40-43
Sorghum 12-13 25 40
Tobacco 12-14 29 35
28
Importance of air temperature on crop plants
1. Temperature influences distribution of crop plants and vegetation .In
Western
Himalayasthetemperaturefallsasaltitudeincreasesandthischangeisresponsibl
e for the change of vegetation at differentaltitudes.
2. The growth and development of crop plants are chiefly influenced by air
temperature.
3. Affects leaf production, expansion andflowering.
4. Physicalandchemicalprocesseswithintheplantsaregovernedbyairtemperature
5. The diffusion rate of gases and liquids changes withtemperature
6. Solubility of different substances is dependent ontemperature
7. Influences biochemical reactions in crops (double or triple with each 10oCrise)
8. Equilibriumofvarioussystemsandcompoundsis afunctionoftemperature
Temperature effects the stability of enzymatic systems in the plants.
Measurement of temperature:
Temperature will be measured by two units
1. Fahrenheit (o F) 2. Centigrade (oC)
Fahrenheitmethod was coined by German scientist Denial Gabriel Fahrenheit in 1710,
Centigrade method was coined by Swadesh astronomer Anders Celsius in 1742
Conversion Formulas:
• C = 5/9 x (F-32).
Temperature is 98.6 F. To convert into Celsius:
• C = 5/9 x (F - 32)
• C = 5/9 x (98.6 - 32)
• C = 5/9 x (66.6)
• C = 37 C
To convert temperatures in degrees Celsius to Fahrenheit, multiply by 1.8 (or 9/5) and add 32.
• Example: (30°C x 1.8) + 32 = 86°F
29
Lecture No: 7
Thermometers – Maximum Thermometer- Minimum Thermometer – Heat
injury – Cold injury
Measurement of Temperature ;Thermometers, one of the most widely recognized weather
instruments, are tools used to measure ambient air temperature. Single Stevenson screen with
Dry bulb thermometer, Wet bulb thermometer, Minimum thermometer and Maximum
thermometer
1.Maximum thermometer: This is a mercury thermometer and records the highest or
maximum temperature reached during past 24 hours or since last setting. Maximum
temperature generally occurs in the world between 1400 to 1600 hrs
2. Minimum thermometer: This thermometer records the lowest temperature of air reached
during last 24 hours or since last setting. Lowest temperature of the day generally occurs just
before sunrise or clear day and after sun rise on cloudy day
3. Dry bulb thermometer: This is a mercury thermometer which gives the prevailing
temperature of air at 4' 3'’ to 4' 6’’ height. It is required to calculate relative humidity and
vapour pressure.
4. Wet bulb thermometer: This is similar to dry bulb thermometer but the bulb of
thermometer acts as a evaporating surface. It is used for calculating dew point, relative
humidity and vapour pressure.
Air temperature and plant injury
I.Low air temperature and plant injury: On exposure of crop plants to low
temperature the following effects are observed. The primary effect of low air
temperature below their optimum temperature is the reduction of rates of
growth and metabolic processes.
1. Suffocation
a Small plants may suffer from deficient oxygen when covered with
densely packed snow.
b Certain toxic substances accumulate in roots and crowns because of low
diffusion of carbon dioxide
2. Physiological drought
a In middle latitudes, drought occurs under cool temperature conditions.
30
This is due to excessive transpiration and absence of absorption of
moisture from the soil, when the soil is in extremely low temperature
conditions.
b The internal water content of crop plants is depleted which may result
in death of leaves.
3. Heaving
a The injury to a plant is caused by lifting upward from the normal
position causing the root to stretch or break at a time when the plant is
growing.
b Sometimes the roots are pushed completely above the soil surface.
c It is difficult for the roots to become firmly established again and the
plants may die because of this mechanical damage and desiccation.
4. Chilling
a Due to this injury some crop plants are killed and others recover under
favourable conditions later on.
b This injury is common in temperate climates where delayed growth and
sterility are common symptoms.
c Moderate wind speeds when the air temperature ranges from 0 to 10oC,
tends to cause very rapid fall in the activity of metabolic processes,
especially respiration in crop plants. Which is known as “chilling
injury”. This results in severe damage and death within a few hours or
days.
d Chilling in the affected plants causes a phase change (“liquid” to
“solid”) in membrane lipids resulting in inactivation of membrane
bound enzymes.
e Sometimes chilling results yellowing of plants.
5. Freezing
1 Freezing damage is caused by the formation of ice crystals in the
intracellular spaces and extracellular spaces.
2 Ice with in the cells cause injury by mechanical damage and plant parts
or entire plant may be killed or damaged.
3 If extracellular ice persists, the gradient of water vapour pressure
between the apoplast and the cells causes water to migrate out of the
cells and into the apoplast, where it freezes, thereby increasing the
amount of ice, in the plant tissue.
4 This results not only in mechanical damage to the tissue, but also brings
about dehydration of cell contents and lead to death of the cell.
II. High air temperature and plant injury
1 High air temperature results in the desiccation of the crop plants also.
2 The injury caused because of short period fluctuation (within a day
highest in noon and lowest at early morning) in air temperature is
known as sun clad.
31
3 The scorching of stem near the soil surface known as stem girdle is
another injury at high air temperatures.
4 Plant tissues escape from high heat by emission of long wave radiation,
convection of heat, and transpiration.
5 However, transpiration is the most effective process in many natural situations.
6 High plant temperatures (> 40oC) are almost invariably due to the
cessation of transpirational cooling, caused by stomatal closure.
7 Exposure of crop plants to temperatures over 45oC for just 30 minutes
can cause severe damage to the leaves of plants.
8 The effect of high temperature are the disruption of cell metabolism
(possibly by protein denaturation), production of toxic substances, and
damage to cellular membranes.
Lecture No: 8
32
Atmospheric Pressure - Effect of atmospheric pressure on crops-Wind waves –
Wind Direction- Wind velocity- Effect of wind on crops- Robinson cup
anemometer
Air molecules will have some weight, these exhibits pressure force. Air pressure or atmospheric
pressure is the weight of air molecules pressing down on the Earth. The pressure of the air
molecules changes as you move upward from sea level into the atmosphere. The highest pressure
is at sea level where the density of the air molecules is the greatest. The standard, or near-average,
atmospheric pressure at sea level on the Earth is 1013.25 millibars, or about 14.7 pounds per
square inch.
Atmospheric pressure depends on the temperature and altitudes. When air gets heated air expands
and resulting in reduction of pressure. Higher atmospheric pressure will be low temperature areas,
as per this low air pressure is in equator. Pressure will be increased while going to north or south
latitudes from equator.
Atmospheric pressure will be measured with ‘Barometer’’ and units for the atmospheric pressure
is ‘milli bars’’ or ‘bars’’
1 inch height of mercury = 33.86 milli bars
1 milli bar = 1/1000 bar
1 milli bar = 0.75 mm height of mercury
1 mm height of mercury = 1.33milli bars.
Effect of pressure on crops:
• In high mountain areas O and CO density is low and plant height is reduced.
2 2
• In these areas UV rays are high and these are not suitable for plant growth.
• When pressure is low, due to high air intensity, only deep rooted and plants with hard
stem can withstand.
• Atmospheric pressure will not directly effect the crop – due to pressure differences
blowing of winds leads to monsoons.
WindVs Current
• Due to pressure difference in different areas air flows from one place to another place. Air
will be static where there is no pressure difference.
• The air moves horizontally from high pressure areas to low pressure areas is called “Wind”
• Longitudinal air movement due to pressure differences is called “current”. Due to these
currents cloud formation and occur.
• Air movement is defined in two ways
• 1. Wind direction 2. Wind velocity
1. Wind direction: wind blowing from south to north is called “South wind”
“Wind ward” means from which direction the air is coming/entering
“Leeward” means to which direction the air is going/exit
33
Wind direction can be known by the “wind vane’’
Arrow edge point is showing the wind coming/ blowing direction and tail point is showing
the wind leaving direction.
Leeward >> ==➔ wind ward
Wind blows/ moves in clock wise and anti clock wise.
Clock wise movement of air - is known as “Veering wind”
Anti clock wise movement of air - is known as “Backing wind”
Adverse climatic situations occur in Backing wind.
Air Intensity:
• Intensity of air flow is known as “wind velocity”
• In general wind speed increases with the height from the surface of the upper troposphere,
and wind velocity is doubled at 33 ft height.
• Wind speed is basically atmospheric quantity caused by air moving from high pressure to
low pressure, usually due to change in temperature.
• Air flow is measured with the help of “Robinsons cup anemometer”
• The most common type of anemometer uses a series of three or four cups that are
positioned around a fixed vertical rod. As the cup catches the wind, they spin around the
rod, the fast wind blows, the faster the cups will rotate around the road. Reading will be
noted with the help of digital meter, which is arranged below the vertical rod, while cups
are spinning.
• This data will be recorded for every 8 hours. With this data wind velocity is expressed for
the past 24 hours.
• Wind velocity units are Km/hour (kmph).
• For Eg: one day meter reading at 8 o clock is = 9000
The very next day meter reading at 8 o clock is= 9480
The difference between two readings for 24 hours = 9480-9000= 480
For 1 hour is = 480/12= 20kmph
Robinsons cup anemometer
34
Effect of wind velocity on crop growth:
Favorable effect
• Gentle or moderate winds are useful for continuous supply and absorption of CO2 which
is used in photosynthesis.
• Calm or moderate blowing winds are useful for crop pollination.
• A minimum wind speed of 15 kmph is needed for winnowing operations.
• Ground water can be lifted up through wind mills.
• Atmospheric temperature will be reduced reducing heat injury to plants.
Unfavorable effect:
• Long exposure to strong winds causes morphological changes in crop plants.
• Exposure of growing plants to hot wind results in dwarfing due to desiccation of plant
tissue and reduce the growth. Sand particles blows with the strong windsdamaging the
plant tissue.
• Wind speed more than50kmph leads to lodging of crops leading to heavy loss.
• Horticultural crops like banana, coconut have fruit drop with heavy loss.
• Wind stronger than 8kmph can lift the sand in arid regions leading to formation of sand
dunes.
• Wind increases the crop water requirement by increasing evaporation due to removal of
accumulated humid air near the leaves.
• Heavy wind during the flowering reduces pollination; causes flower shed increases sterility
and reduces fruit set in all crops.
• Heavy strong winds cause wind erosion and cover the crops with sand in desert areas.
Lecture No: 9
Atmospheric humidity and its expression – Wet and Dry bulb
thermometers - Effect of Humidity on Crops
Humidity is an important factor in crop production and it is not an independent factor but closely
related to rainfall and temperature. It plays significant role in weather and climate. The dampness
of air is called humidity.
1. Absolute humidity
It is the ratio of the mass of water vapour to the volume of moist air in which it is
-1
contained. Absolute humidity is expressed as kg m .
2. Specific humidity
35
It is defined as the ratio of the mass of water vapour in a sample of moist air to
the total mass of the sample. It is expressed as kg of water vapour in a kg of
moist air.
3. Relative humidity
It is expressed as the ratio of actual vapor pressure to the saturated pressure expressed in
terms of percentage. It is most common measure of atmospheric humidity.
Dry and Wet bulb Thermometer:
An instrument used to measure the amount of water vapor or relative humidity in the air. It is a
combination of wet-and-dry –bulb thermometers mounted on a frame. It essentially consists of
two ordinary, accurate, mercury thermometers. One has thin muslin wrapped around it and is kept
wet; it is called a wet bulb thermometer. The other is dry bulb thermometer this shows the current
temperature, where as wet bulb thermometer shows a somewhat lower temperature, the result of
the latent heat of evaporation, which depends on the relative humidity of the air. The difference
between the two thermometers is a measure of relative humidity of air, which is calculated by
formula.
Hair hygrometer:
A Hair hygrometer that measures relative humidity by means of variation in length of a stand of
human hair.
36
Effects of humidity on crops
a. Humidity is the invisible vapour content of the air and is of great
importance in determining the vegetation of a region.
b. It affects the internal water potential of plants.
c. Humidity is a major determinant of potential evapotranspiration. So, it
determines the water requirement of crops.
d. It influences certain physiological phenomena including transpiration.
e. Change in relative humidity can produce various morphological and
anatomical changes in the plants. For example, orchids grow
abundantly in humid forests as epiphytes depend for their moisture
supply on the atmosphere by developing certain morphological and
anatomical characteristics that are not found in other plants
(hygroscopic aerial roots).
f. Xerophytes in desert region where relative humidity is low show certain
adaptations to conserve water.
g. High relative humidity can prolong the survival of crops under moisture stress.
h. Relative humidity plays a significant role in the outbreak of disease and
pest epidemics. High humidity promotes the growth of some
saprophytic and parasitic fungi and bacteria which cause various plant
diseases.
i. Very high or very low relative humidity is not conductive for higher yields.
Lecture No: 10
Evaporation- Effect of evaporation on Crops- USWB open pan evaporimeter
Evaporation
The sun is the source of energy that activates the hydrologic cycle i.e. the
heat required for evaporation is supplied by the sun. The moisture in the
atmosphere is supplied by evaporation.
Evaporation is defined as “A physical process in which liquid water is
converted into its vapour”.
In this process molecules of water having sufficient kinetic energy to
overcome the attractive forces tending to hold them within the body of liquid
37
water are projected through the water surfaces.
Factors affecting the evaporation
Evaporation losses from a fully exposed water surface are essentially
the functions of several factors.
I Environmental factors
1. Water temperature: With an increase of temperature the kinetic energy of
water molecules increases and surface tension decreases. So, the rate of
evaporation increases with a rise in temperature. The maximum amount of
water vapour that can exist in any given space is a function of temperature.
2. Wind: The velocity of wind is directly proportional to evaporation from a
fully exposed surface and vice versa. The reason is that the dry wind replaces
the moist air near the water. The process of evaporation takes place
continuously when there is a supply of energy to provide latent heat of
evaporation (approximately 540 calories per gram of water evaporated at
100oC).
3.Relative humidity: A mechanism to remove the vapour so that the vapour
pressure of the water vapour in the moist layer adjacent to the liquid surface is
less than the saturated vapour pressure of the liquid i.e., a vertical gradient of
vapour pressure exists above the surface.
When the air above water is dry or has low relative humidity, the
evaporation will be greater than when air has high relative humidity over the
water.
4.Pressure: The evaporation is more at low pressure and vice versa.
II Water factors
1. Composition of water
The dissolved salts and other impurities decreases the rate of evaporation.
Evaporation is inversely proportional to the salinity of water. The rate of
evaporation from the surface of the sea is less than that of fresh water in
rivers. Under equivalent conditions ocean water evaporates 5 per cent less
than fresh water in rivers.
2. Area of evaporation
If two volumes of water are equal in two containers evaporation will be greater for
the one having the larger exposed surface
Effect of Evaporation on crops:
• Evaporation decides the water requirement of crop.
• It changes the micro environment of the crop.
• Evaporation is the major factor in heat budget.
• It plays a vital role in water saving / moisture conservation activity.
38
USWB CLASS A PAN EVAPORIMETER:
• A standard USWB class- A pan evaporimeter is the most widely used evaporimeter in the
world for finding evaporation from the free water surface. It consists of a 120 cm diameter
and 25.2 cm deep pan made of 20gauge galvanized iron sheet with a stilling well. A
vertical pointer is provided in the stilling well to show the level of water maintained in the
pan. The pan is painted white and is placed on wooden frame so that air may circulate
beneath the pan.
• Daily evaporation rate is given by the fall of water level in the stilling well during 24 hours
period. Measurement of the fall of water level may be made at closer intervals to know the
evaporation rate during different parts of the day.
• Volume of the water = area X depth
Lecture No: 11
Rainfall- Precipitation- Fog- Types of Rainfall- Measurement of
rainfall- Monsoons-Effect of rainfall on Crops
Generally the terms precipitation and rainfall are used as synonyms with each other. Precipitation
is defined as "Earthward falling of water drops or ice particles that have formed by rapid
condensation in the atmosphere and are too large to remain suspended in the atmosphere". In
condensation the water vapor is suspended in the air in different forms. But, in the precipitation an
appreciable deposit either in solid or liquid form takes place on the earth surface. There are some
common forms and different types in precipitation.
Rainfall:
Hot air moves up from the earth surface, condenses the water vapor to small water droplets in the
atmosphere. These water droplet size reaches to 0.2 mm reaches down to the earth by the
gravitational force is called rainfall.
Favourable points to from water vapour to liquid:
1. Presence of condensation nuclei like dust, smoke, pollen grains in air.
2. Sufficient vapour moisture in air
3. Due point temperature.
39
Fog: when warm and moist air cools, tiny water droplets are formed that stay in the air is
called “fog”
Types of rainfall
There are mainly 3 types of rainfall which are as follows:
1. Convectional rains
1 The air near the ground become shot and light due to heating. Then it starts
upward movement. This process is known as convection (This differs
slightly from ‘Convection'.
2 As the air moves upward it cools at about 10oC per kilometre i.e., at dry
adiabatic lapse rate.
3 As it becomes saturated, relative humidity reaches to 100 percent and dew
point is reached where the condensation begins. This level (height) is
known as condensation level.
4 Above this level, air cools at about 4oC per kilometre slightly less than i.e.,
saturated adiabatic lapse rate. First, cloud is formed.
5 Then, the further condensation results into precipitation. These rains are
known as convectional rains and mostly occurs in the tropics.
2. Orographic rains
1 When moist air coming from the sea or ocean strikes mountain it cannot
move horizontally. It has to overcome the mountains.
2 When this air rises upward, cools down, cloud is formed and condensation
starts giving precipitation.
3 These rains are known as orographic rains.
4 These are also known as `relief rains" as the rains also occurs when the air
from sea or ocean strike or pass over relief barriers.
5 Due to these processes rains with high intensity are possible on the
windward side of the mountain.
3. Cyclonic and frontal rains
1 The rains received from cyclones are known as` cyclonic rains’
2 When two opposing air currents with different temperatures meet, vertical
lifting takes place.
40
3 This convection gives rise to condensation and precipitation which is
known as frontal precipitation.
OROGRAPHIC RAINFALL
CONVECTIONAL RAINFALL
Rain gauge:
A rain gauge is a metrological instrument to measures the precipitating rain in given time per unit
area. The instrument consists of a collection container which is placed in an open area. The
precipitation is measured in terms of the height of the precipitated water accumulated in the
container per given time and is expressed in millimeters. Since the same amount of rain
precipitation is assumed to be occurring around the container, the area of collection is not a factor.
However, it should not be too small, neither should it be too large.
41
Monsoons
The term monsoon is derived from an Arabic word “Mausum” means
“Season”. There are different concepts to explain Indian monsoons. Of them
the “Thermal concept” proposed by Halley in 1636 is of more practical
relevance than other concepts like aero logical, Flohinsetc. The two types of
distinguished monsoons over India are
a. South-West monsoon (SW), 2. North-East monsoon(NE)
42
1. South-West monsoon(SW)
1 In summer the land mass of India heats quickly and develops a strong
low pressure centre, particularly over north-west India during April and
it exists up to September.
2 As the pressure over the adjacent oceans is high, as to land pressure
gradient is established.
3 Therefore, the surface air flow is from the high pressure areas over the
oceans towards the low pressure areas over the heated land.
4 Even though India should have North east monsoon winds throughout
the year due to its position in NE trade wind zone the SW winds
predominate because of the low pressure through lessing along Ganges
and upper India.
5 Theairthatisattractedintothecentresoflowpressurefromovertheoceansis
“Warm and moist”.
6 This monsoon is active from June to September.
7 The rainfall received is 80 to 90 per cent of the total annual rainfall of
India covering all parts.
8 This monsoon enters Kerala on June and by 15 July reaches the
northern most parts of the country.
9 There are two branches of the South West Monsoon.
a. The Arabian Sea branch: This branch crosses Western ghats.
b. The Bay of Bengal branch: This branch crosses Gangetic plains.
Onset of SW- Monsoon
43
North-East monsoon
1. A complete reversal of the South west monsoon winds takes place during winter.
2. In this season the land mass over India cools more rapidly than the
surrounding oceans.
3. So, a strong high pressure centre develops over the continent.
4. On the other hand, the pressure over the adjacent oceans is relatively lower.
5. As a consequence, the pressure gradient is directed from land to sea and
winds flow in North-East direction.
6. Therefore, there is an outflow of air from the continental land mass to the
adjacent oceans.
7. The air flow brings “Cold dry” air towards low latitudes.
8. This monsoon is active from October to mid-December.
9. The rainfall received is 10 to 20 per cent of the total annual rainfall of
India covering parts of Andhra Pradesh (Nellore, Chittoor) and Tamil
Nadu.
10. The driving mechanisms of monsoon
• Differential heating of land and ocean masses causes a pressure
gradient and wind is driven accordingly.
• Twist to wind by rotation of earth.
• Moist process determines strength, vigour, location etc.
11. The path of monsoon air is distributed by diverse features like
• Earth’s rotation
• Mountain barriers
• The retarding effect of friction as winds blow overland.
44
Fig: Onset of NE-Monsoon
Withdrawal of monsoon
1. The monsoon withdraws from northern India around mid-September.
2. The monsoon withdraws from extreme South of Indian Peninsula by December.
Break and Active in monsoon
1 A period of lean rainfall occurs when “Trough” shifts towards foot hills of
Himalayas which is known as break in the monsoon over Indiansub-
continent.
2 When the “Trough” shifts south of its normal position, monsoon becomes
active over India.
Economic importance and influence of monsoon rains on farm operations
1 Nearly 54 per cent of population of the world depends on monsoon for
their income.
2 Monsoon rains are considered as life giving rains. Rice or paddy which is a
major food crop depends on only rainfall for its yield. If rainfall is not
uniformly distributed, it results in huge loss of rice crop in particular and
all other crops in general.
3 Heavy rain during harvesting causes lodging of crop and seed germination.
If rainfall does not occur immediately after sowing, it results in
germination failure.
4 As in the case of other weather elements the amount and distribution of
rainfall influence the crop yield considerably.
45
Example: Paddy and sugarcane require high amount of water as compared
to groundnut and castor.
5 Timely and evenly distributed rainfall during the crop growth is more
beneficial than heavy rainfall occurring at once.
6 Rainfall of 20 mm is necessary to wet the soil up to a depth of 15cmwhich
rainfall helps in decomposition of organic matter and also influences the
fertility status of the soil by way of leaching of nutrients.
7 Many farm operations such as seed bed preparation, sowing,
intercultivation etc. depend on rainfall.
High rainfall effects:
1. High rainfall effects the infiltration due to saturation of soil, with this aeration to the root
zone is effected as a result crop dies. Not only that the plant nutrients leaches to the lower
layers resulting in nutrient deficiency.
Low rainfall effects:
1. Low and uneven distribution ofrainfall resultsin dry spells. In this dry spell plant growth
and yields will get reduced, due to non availability of nutrients.
2. During the dry spells evapo-transpiration is high than the soil moisture.
Lecture No: 12 & 13
Weather Disaster Management- Rainfall, Heat and Cold Waves,
Windstorms, Thunder Storms And Dust Storms, Tornados, Defective
insolation
The deviation of climatic factors considerably from their normal values is
referred as "Adverse weather" or" Adverse climate" depending on duration
of such impact.
The following are the adverse weather conditions and the possible management
strategies
1.Rainfall:
a. High rainfall- floods
High rainfall in less time leads to floods, with this water moves to low lying areas and
causes floods as a result leading to crop lodging and losses. High rainfall more than
12.5 cm(125 mm) in 2 hours 30 min is considered as high rainfall.
Losses: crop lodging, sand Dunes, losses to agricultural properties, soil erosion,
mortality oflivestock.
Management
1. Construction of major irrigation projects.
2. Afforestation
3. Construction of drainage channels in crop field.
46
4. Contour cultivation in low lying areas.
b.Low rainfall- dry spells/ drought
a. Low and uneven distribution of rainfall resultsin dry spells, main reasons for this is
improper land preparation – resulting to hindrance in infiltration
b. Not practicing the methods to arrest the soil moisture losses.
c. High seed rate and high density planting.
Management
a. Collecting the runoff into tanks and utilization in dry spells.
b. Cultivation of grasses on bunds to arrest the bunds damage.
c. Planting the wind brakes/ fencing plants to reduce the evaporation.
d. Cultivation of suitable crop varieties in drought prone areas.
e. Selection of short duration crop varieties.
2. Cold Waves
During winter (December - February), temperature decreases generally
over the Indian subcontinent. It is lower in northern-India and higher in
southern- India. This
fallintemperaturemaycausedamagetothecrops.Ifthetemperaturedropsonfreezing
or below, a frost may occur which causes severe damage to the crops/crop
plants. Threat of frost is danger tocrops.
1. Frostisaformofcondensationthatformsoncoldobjectswhenthedewpointis
below freezing
2. Frosts are of twotypes.
a. Advection or air mass frost: Which results when the temperature at
the surface in an airmass is belowfreezing
b. Radiationfrost:Whichoccursonclearnightswithatemperatureinversion
3. There is a special case of frost caused by loss of heat by evaporation.
This occurs when cold rain showers wet the leaves and are then
followed by dry wind.
Management
• Maintenance of soilmoisture.
• Wrapping plants with insulating material and enclosing the basal part of
the plant.
• Proper siteselection.
• Choice of growingseason.
• Breeding of cold resistantvarieties.
3. Heat Waves
These are very harmful during summer. These are experienced over
Deccan and Central parts of India during March to May. The harmful effects
47
include shedding of fruits, plants drying of water resources.
1 Loss of water by evaporation from irrigationchannels.
2 Transpiration increases from plants beyond recoupinglevels
3 Plants tend to wilt and die owing to rapiddesiccation.
4 Hotwindscauseshrivellingeffectatmilkstageofallagriculturalcrops.
Management
Adoption of specific agronomic practices like, shelterbelts, choice of varieties etc.
4. Thunderstorms, dust storms and hailstorms
These storms are known as local severe storms. As many as 44,000
thunder storms occur daily on earth.
1 These are formed in a situation where a great deal of the energy for their
genesis and development comes from the release of the latent heat of
condensation in rising humidair.
2 These local storms cause severe damage to the standing crop by causing
mechanical injury to theplants.
3 In dust storms, the dust is raised by the wind covers small plants, which
may cause stomata closure andsuffocation.
4 Hailscausedirectdamagetocropsbylodging,shatteringofseedsetc.,depending
on theirintensity.
Management
1 Prevention of hails by hail suppressiontechniques.
2 Following forecasts of weather and protectingcrops.
3 Spraying of salt on harvested paddy, to prevent the germination / sprouting
of harvestedproduce.
5.Tornado
This is a violent, destructive storm of small horizontal dimensions. A
cumulonimbuscloudformsintoafunnelshapewithanvortexextendingfromthebase
of the storm to the surface. The Whirl-wind encircles a small dimension of
about 500 meters. These are capable of causing severe structural and other
damages. The violent winds associated with this abnormality are strong
upward air currents. The tornados occurring on water are known as
“Waterspouts”.
Management
1 Warning inadvance
2 Precautionstoprotecttheagriculturalproduceliketransportationtosafetyplac
es etc.
3 Quick removal of debris immediately afterdamage.
48
6.Excessive or defectiveinsolation
Excessive solar radiation results in rise of soil and air temperatures. Defective
insolation with consistently cloudy weather on one hand and consistently bright and
high intensity sunshine on the other hand causes enormous damage to crop plants.
1 Cloudy weather retard growth, affect pollination and cause disease and
pest incidence.
2 High solar radiation intensity cause pollen burst or flowerdrop.
Management
Since, these are very rare, the location specific solutions like
1 Proper siteselection.
2 Allowing airdrainage.
3 Adequate watersupply.
4 Pruning of orchardtrees.
5 Spray of chemicals and planthormones.
6 Covering plants with "hot caps" (covering plants with some standard and
recommended material) may provebeneficial.
Lecture No.14
Weather Forecasting
The weather elements which influence the agricultural operations and crop
production can be forecast upto different spans of time. Weather forecast is defined as
“prediction of weather for the next few days to follow”.
49
Utility of weather forecasts
In India the total annual pre harvest losses of various crops range from 10 to 100
percent. Similarly, the post harvest losses average upto 10 percent.When an accurate
weather forecast is given for the needs of agriculture it contributes immensely to the
monetary benefits of the farmers.
• Short term adjustments in daily and weekly agricultural operations.
If heavy rain occurs immediately after sowing of seeds the seeds are
washed away. If a hail storm occurs during harvesting it causes shedding
of grains and fruits. If warned in time the farmer would hurry up some of
the operations or postpone them suitably adjusting the cropping
operations to weather conditions.
• Minimising input losses resulting from adverse weather (seeds,
chemicals, fertilizers, diesel or electric power used for irrigation etc).
The critical periods for normal growth of the crop can be adjusted for
healthy growth and development of crop.
• Markedly improve the yields of crops both qualitatively and quantitatively.
The yield of the crop is determined by weather conditions to a greater
extent, seeds, chemicals fertilizers etc. If weather is predicted in advance
the amount spent on irrigation, electricity, labour can be reduced
substantially. Nearly, 50per cent of farmers will definitely be benefited if
warnings are given well in advance to them.
If farmer knows when the monsoon rains are likely to commence and
how the rainfall could be from time to time in the season he would be
able to plan his agricultural operations like preparation of seed bed,
manuring, intercultivation including drying and threshing of the produce.
Prime requirements for weather forecasting
1. A good dataset
2. A good method which can be used toforecast.
Weather data used in forecasting
The following weather elements are measured routinely.
1. Pressure, temperature, wind (speed and direction)humidity.
2. Rainfall, cloud (type and amount), visibility pressure change, present
and past weather, maximum and minimum temperaturesetc.
Types of observations
The main observations used in different weather forecasting types are as follows:
1. Surface observations
2. Upper air observations
3. Aircraft observations
4. Radar observations
50
