PROFESSOR JAYASHANKAR TELANGANA STATE
AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY
AGRICULTURAL POLYTECHNIC
DETAILED LECTURE NOTES ON
FORESTRY, MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
Course No. DA-281 3 (2+1)
Dr. K. SWATHI
Asst. Professor (Horti.),
Agricultural Polytechnic, Jagtial
&
Dr. K. SUKUMAR
Vice-Principal,
Agricultural Polytechnic, Jagtial
C. No. DA 281 3 (2+1)
FORESTRY, MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
Lecture Outlines
S.No. Topic Page No.
1 Introduction to Forestry- Forests, Climate, Soils, Floods
2 Introduction to Forestry- Forests, Climate, Soils, Floods
3 National Forest Policies- Indian Forest Act
4 Trees- Growth Stages- Principles of Silviculture and Afforestation
on Different Sites
5 Principles of Nursery Raising – Types of Forest Nurseries-
Selection of Site or Nursery- Management
6 Planting- Digging of Pits Based on Soils- Planting Types
7 Tending Operations
8 Cultivation, Climate, Soils, Morphological Characteristics of
Trees- Nursery Management – Inter Cultivation- Yield In Teak
9 Neem, Bamboo
10 Subabul, Eucalyptus
11 Tamarind
12
Karakkaya
13 Jatropha- Management
14 Pongamia (Pungam)
15 Social Farm Forestry
16 Vanamahosthavam
17 Energy Plantations
18 Farm Forestry- Definition, Scope- Commercial And Non
Commercial Farm Forestry
19 Wind Breaks And Shelter Belts- Important Points- Type of
Planting- Advantages
20 Agroforestry- Definition- Types- Advantages
21 Timber Based Forest Products- Good Quality Timber
22 Minor Forest Products- Tendu Leaves, Lac, Natural Colours,
Oils, Katha And Cutch- Tannins- Incense Products
23 Importance of Medicinal And Aromatic Plants
24 Ashwagandha
25 Aloe Vera
26 Sacred Basil
27 Senna, Coleus
28 Kalmegh
29 Lemon Grass
30 Citronella
31 Palmarosa, Geranium
32 Davana
LECTURE 1 & 2
INTRODUCTION TO FORESTRY- FORESTS, CLIMATE, SOILS, FLOODS,
IMPACT ON HUMAN
Forests have been occupied on the earth surface from immortal time and provide habitat
for the wildlife. At the dawn of civilization, when man first took to settled cultivation, trees were
cleared to pave the way for agriculture. In fact, patches of cultivated land were surrounded by
dense forests. Gradually as the population of human beings grew, more and more forests were
cleared. Many centuries later, vast patches of forest land had been cleared and were being used to
grow food. With the depletion and degradation of natural resources by overuse we are still
lagging far behind in the process of development through modernization.
Forest:
The word ‘Forest’ is derived from Latin word ‘Foris’ which means “outside”. Forest has
been defined as an area which is set aside for the production of timber and other forest produce
(or) maintained under woody vegetation for certain indirect benefits which it provides example
climatic or protective.
(or)
Forest is an area of land where it occupied by tall and dense trees in an uncultivable land.
Forestry:
Forestry has been defined as the theory and practice of all that constitutes the creation,
conservation and scientific management of forests and perfect utilization of their resources.
It is an applied science which is concerned not only with the raising or cultivation of
forest crops but their protection, perpetuation, mensuration, management, valuation and finance
as well as utilization of the forest products for the service of the nation.
It may be intensive offering the practices for obtaining maximum in volume and quality
of products per unit area within a specified period of time.
History of Indian Forestry:
In India, the area under forest cover and the forest products are very meager. Forests in
India cover about 23.8%. Estimates of the area currently classified as forest land in India is
around 75 million hectares. This represents 23 % of total land area of the country (327.7 million
hectares) as against 331/3% enunciated in the National forest policy, 1988.
Telangana state has a geographical area of 112077 sq. km. Forest area in the state is
28,854 sq. km, covering 25.11 % of the total geographical area of the state. Khammam district
occupies first position in forest area (7945 sq. km), followed by Adilabad district (7101 sq. km)
and Nalgonda district is in the last position (896 sq. km).
As compared to the world average of 1.6 hectares per capita forest area, India has only
0.11 ha per capita forest area. The country has lost about 43.4 m ha of forest area during 1951-52
to 1982-83 at an average of 1.5 m ha per annum. The main reasons for lost of forest area are
undue biotic interference, excessive cutting of trees and diversion of area for agriculture for river
valley projects and industries, etc.
Measures have been taken during the five year plans for large scale development and
rehabilitation works were launched in the forestry.
Branches of forestry:
1. Silviculture: Silviculture is the branch of forestry which deals with the establishment,
development, care and reproduction of stands of timber.
2. Forestry soils: The branch of forestry deals with the composition, physical and chemical characters of
soil where the forest is to be established.
3. Dendrology: Study of description, classification and identification of various tree species.
4. Forest mensuration: Deals with the measurement of forest produce.
5. Forest management: Forest management is defined as the practical application of the scientific,
technical and economic principles to a forest estate for the production of certain desired results.
6. Forest utilization: The branch of forestry concerned with the harvesting, conversion of the forest
produce for a variety of uses like timber, fuel, pulp, wood, etc.
7. Wood Technology: Deals with the structural, physical and mechanical properties and behaviour of
wood under varying conditions.
8. Forest Policy & Administration: A set of rules, regulations, laws and procedures adopted by a
Government to attain fixed objectives in forestry for the welfare of the nation.
9. Forest Protection: Concerned with the activities directed towards the prevention and control
of damage to forests by man, animals, fire, insects, disease or other injurious and destructive
agencies.
10. Agroforestry: Cultivation of crops and forest plants either sequentially or simultaneously on
the same piece of land for sustainable land management.
Forest environment:
Globally, 1/4 th of the land area is occupied by forests whereas in India, it covers 1/5th of the total
land area. Forests greatly affect the climate, wind velocity and soil erosion.
1) Forests – climate: Microclimate of a place mainly depends on the latitude and altitude of that
place. In the similar manner, microclimate also depends on the topography and trees present in
that area.
2) Temperature: Trees with thick foliage of dense forests greatly influence the air temperature
where it reduces the maximum temperature and rises the minimum temperature. Temperature
effect is more in evergreen forests than deciduous forests.
3) Wind movement: Forests act as mechanical barriers for wind and control the high wind
velocity. The studies on wind velocity in different heights of a tree as follows below:
a) Foliage at crown – 43% (outer side)
b) Middle of the foliage - 14%
c) Below the foliage – 20%
4) Humidity: Humidity will be more inside the forest which ranges from 5-10% compared to
outside area. This is due to the transpiration from stomata of plants trees.
Soil characters (Physical and chemical):
1) Soil texture and soil structure: Forest soils are more friable and crumby in nature. Forests
alter the sandy soils to clay and vice verse. Roots of the trees loosen the soil and the dead plants
supplies organic matter to the forest soil.
2) Soil temperature: Foliage, humus, leaf litter (acts as insulators) influences the soil
temperature.
3) Soil moisture: As water deposits on the leaf litter and transpiration from leaves gradually
reduces the soil moisture but increases the soil water. Forests help in reduction of surface run off,
evaporation losses though permeability and water holding capacity are increases which
ultimately increases the water level of the soil.
4) Water table: Forests reduce the water table of soils irrespective its type. This is mainly due to
presence of various species like Sal, Teak and Oak in which roots distribute to 100 m2 area and
penetrates up to 8 m. depth.
Chemical properties of soil
Forests improve the chemical properties of soils which consist of N, Ca, P, K, Mg and
other elements. Forest soils are acidic in nature (acidic PH).
Forests and Floods:
Forest plays important role in reduction of floods in the below mentioned ways
1. Utilizes most of the moisture for the process of evapotranspiration.
2. Leaf litter restricts the water to enter into the soil.
3. Increases the infiltration capacity of soil.
4. Reduces silting in coastal places by control of soil erosion.
Role of forest on human health
• Noise and air pollution are the major causes for main diseases. Generally forests filter
the air. Air with dust particles enters into forests and deposits these particles at stem,
branches, and leaves. According to a scientist, the dust filtering capacity of forests is
incredible. For example one hectare area of pine trees filters 32 ton of dust.
• Forests directly protects from harmful gases which inhales the Co and releases O , even
2 2
forests filter the hazardous gases like SO .
2
• Noise released from machines, industries and vehicles affects the blood pressure of
human beings. Forests can absorb the sound to some extent.
Based on a study, a park with 50 m wide reduces the traffic sound to 20-30 decibels where
as some people believe that coniferous forests decreases the Bronchitis diseases due to release
of ethereal oil.
LECTURE -3
NATIONAL FOREST POLICIES- INDIAN FOREST ACT
Although the forest management in India has been on a sound footing since 1864, the
condition of the forests continued to deteriorate through over exploitation. Efforts were made to
conserve the forest resources when the policies were formulated. Forest policy promotes actions
of a Government for the preservation, maintenance, enhancement of forests and the optimum
utilization of forest resources to attain national welfare. The first effort in this direction was
made by enunciating the first forest policy of India in India on 19th, October, 1894.
The important features of this policy:
1. The state forests are to be administered for the benefit of the public.
2. Forests on hill slopes may be protected.
3. Whenever an effective demand for cultivable land exists, the needed land can only be supplied
from the forest area without habitation.
4. Royalty for the government must be collected for various facilities enjoyed by people.
The main aim of the first forest policy was to collect revenue from the forests and please
the local population by granting rights and concessions. There was no intention to improve the
forestry management in general. After independence the Government of India, ministry of
Agriculture enunciated the second National Forest Policy on 12th May, 1952 on the basis of six
dominant needs of the country,
1. The need for evolving a balanced and complementary land use, so that each land allotted
should produce most and deteriorate least.
a) The need for checking erosion, progressing place along the treeless bank areas of rivers and
on vast stretches of undulating waste lands leading to ravine formation.
b) Denudation in mountain regions on which depends the perennial water supply of the river
system.
c) Invasions of seas and on coastal tracts and shifting sand dunes.
2. The need for establishing tree lands wherever possible for public use ensuring increasing
supplies of grazing, small wood for agricultural implements and in particular of fire wood to
release the cow dung as a manure.
3. The need for sustained supply of timber and other forest produce required for defense,
industry etc.
4. The need for the realization of the maximum annual revenue.
The policy recommends that India should aim at maintaining one third (1/3rd) of its land
area under forest. But this policy mainly aims at conservation forestry and there is no emphasis
on production forestry. Therefore to make the existing forest with their low productivity should
be converted into plantation forestry of high productivity which is possible only through
enunciation of new forest policy of 1988, which has been announced in the parliament by the
Minister of Environment, Government of India, on 7th December, 1988.
The main objectives of this policy are:
1. The national goal should be to have 1/3rd of the total land area of the country under forest to
save fragile ecosystems.
2. Forests that clothe steep slopes, catchments of rivers, lakes, and reservoirs should be protected
and checking extension of sand dunes.
3. Raising of plants on waste lands for fire wood and fuel wood purpose.
4. Construction of dams, reservoirs, mining and expansion of agriculture should be consistent
with the needs for conservation of trees and forests.
5. Restrictions on grazing, browsing in forest areas by levying grazing fee to discourage people
in forests area from raising large herds of essential livestock.
6. The new forest policy also invites a special care for the needs of wild life conservation.
Indian Forests Act (1972)
To consolidate the law relating to forests, the transit of forest produce and the duty
leviable on timber and other forest produce. This law also discusses the measures to be taken for
the area expansion under forest cover.
Duties of Indian Forests Act:
1. Deforestation in restricted areas.
2. Allowing the animals for grazing illegally.
3. Demolition of trees, cutting of timber due to negligence.
4. Firing of trees without the instruction of forest officers.
5. Removal of bark of trees or removal of leaves.
6. Without bounding to the rules, hunting, shooting, fish catching, polluting the water, erection of
fish nets or arranging the cages.
7. Catching of elephants in the areas of elephants protection act.
If any person violates the above, he will be liable for the punishments like to pay Rs. 500
or 6 months prison or both and they have to pay according to the judgment given by the orders of
the court.
LECTURE. 4
TREES- GROWTH STAGES- PRINCIPLES OF SILVICULTURE
AND AFFORESTATION ON DIFFERENT SITES
TITLE
Stages of a tree: There are four stages from growth to development of a tree which are
1. Seedling: Germination to 3 feet height (1 m)
2. Sapling: From 3 feet to the height where the lower branches are emerged excluding the dead bark.
3. Pole: Flowering to crown expansion stage.
4. Tree: After reaching the Pole stage there will be a reduction in the growth rate and subsequently crown
portion will be developed.
Parts of a tree
1. Crown: Crown is defined as the upper branchy part of a tree above bole comprising of
branches and foliage springing from the bole.
Bole: Lower portion of the stem upto the point where the main branches are given off is known
as the bole. Some trees have inherent tendency to form a tall, erect, straight bole with relatively
small branches when grown even in open.
2. Stem: Stem is the principal axis of plant from which buds and shoots are developed. In trees,
stem, bole and trunk are synonymous but bole is sometimes used to refer to only lower part of
the stem upto a point where the main branches are given off.
Tapered stem: Decrease in diameter of the stem of a tree from base to apex is known as tapered
stem.
Buttressed stem: In many species of wet tropical forests and few in drier tropics, the swellings
at the base of the stem is far more pronounced and may even extended upto 15 feet or more up
the stem. This form is called buttressed.
Fluted stem: Bole above the basal swell may be smoothly rounded in section or it may show
irregular involutions and swellings which are referred as fluted stem.
3. Root: Root is that portion of the plant which develops inside the soil and away from light. The
roots of trees support them firmly to the ground, absorb soil moisture containing mineral salts
and send it to stem for onward transmission to the leaves.
Kinds of roots:
Tap root: Tap root is the primary descending root formed by direct prolongation of the radical
of the embryo. In trees, it is the main axis of the large root system and descends vertically below
the stem. It is conical in shape, develops towards the permanent moisture in the soil and
sometimes attains considerable height.
Eg. Tap root system goes up to 100 ft. in Prosopis specigera and Acacia Arabica
Lateral roots: Roots arise from the tap root and spread laterally to support the tree. As the tap
root grows, it develops lateral roots which are branched and re-branched and ultimately form
rootlets.
Mycorrhiza: In certain species, fine extremities of rootlets are formed behind root cap instead of
being covered with root hairs are found to be invaded by specific non-pathogenic soil fungi. The
invasion results in the formation of composite structures which are neither roots nor fungi. This
composite structure or invaded rootlets is called Mycorrhiza.
Mangrove roots: In water logged and submerged soils, the Rhizophores are supported on a
system of aerial stilt roots, while in some species send up peg like projections from their roots
consists of sponge soft tissue called Pneumatophores. This kind of roots helps in the exchange of
gases and prevents plants from rottening.
Adventitious roots: Adventitious roots are the roots produced from parts of the plants other than
the radical or subdivision.
Principles of silviculture:
Siliviculture is the theory and practice of raising forest crops is known as Silviculture. It is
the science that combines biology, mathematics, management and economics. Hence, study of
Silviculture signifies the following objects:
1. To derive environmental benefits.
2. Rising of tree species which have more economic value.
3. Production of high quality timber
4. Production of more timber per unit area
5. Reduction of rotation period
6. Afforestation of blank areas
7. Production of new species
8. Introduction of exotic species
9. Increase in the production of fuel and fodder
10. Development of forest based industries
Afforestation on different sites:
1. Shifting sand dunes: Sand dunes lack in humus and soil moisture. These are widely
distributed in the states of Rajasthan and Haryana. These areas are characterized by
annual rainfall of 150-250 mm and temperature of 490C and faces high wind velocity.
Growing of shelter belts reduces the wind velocity to some extent.
Eg. Acacia nilotica, Ziziphus, etc.
2. Saline and alkaline soils: These soils are mainly found in humid and sub humid areas.
Due to high salt concentration these soils lack soil moisture, poor in gaseous exchange
also have high pH. All these restrict the elements like Na. growing of salt resistant plants
is good in these areas.
Eg: Acacia nilotica, Prosopis juliflora, Azadaricta indica, Butea monosperma, Pongamea
pinnata, Ailanthus excelasa
3. Ravine Lands: Ravine means a group of small canals which forms gullies. This type of
soils is mainly found in Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.
Eg: Eucalyptus, Dalbergia sisso, Dendrocalamus strictus, Acasia nilotica, Prosopis julifera
4. Lateritic soils: In India, these soils are present in northern and southern parts. These are
low fertile, lack of soil moisture restricts the plant growth.
Tectona grandis grown in in laterictic soils of West Bengal provided good results. Other species
like Agave sisalina, Agave cantula, eucalyptus, Grevillea robusta, Anacardium occidentalis are
suitable for these soils.
5. Coastal Sea Sands: North and west coast of India are mainly consists of this type of soils.
Soils are characterized by alkaline nature, availability of lower amount of nutrients and less
water holding capacity.
Eg: Casurina equsitufolia, Avecenia officinalis, Eucalyptus
6. Dry rocky and Murrumy areas: These are the problematic soils, also known as skeletal
soils. These soils are present in high and low rainfall areas.
Eg: In low rainfall areas – Eucalyptus teritiocornis, Dalbergia strictus, Ailanthus excela,
Hardwickia binnata
In high rainfall areas- Eucalyptus, Acasia
7. Wet Lands: Soils present in submerged areas are called wet lands. These are mainly present
in high rainfall areas.
Eg: Aerobusta
8. Grass Lands: Grasslands appear in some places. These grow in very thick and cause
restriction for tree growth. In Imperata, Cymbopogan, Saccharus species roots grow at a very
depth and cannot be removable with ploughing.
Selection of fast growing species helps in the restriction of grasses growth.
Eg: Sisso, Ailanthus excelsa, Bombex ceiba
9. Denuded and Eroded Hill slope: These are mainly present in sub tropical and tropical areas
of the country. The hilly tracks generally face the soil erosion. Denuded hill slopes are mainly
found in western Himalayas. These soils are formed due to heavy grazing, forest fires.
Eg : Pinus roxiburgi, Acasia modesta, Casia siamea, Albizzia lebbeck
10. Canal banks: Area beside the large canals is left for the management of canals. In Uttar
Pradesh larger area is found under canal banks.
Eg: Dalbergia sissoo, Acacia nilotica, Syzygium cumini
11. Road side areas: Trees grown on road sides should be protected from stray animals. Quick
grown, compact crown should not be of climbing nature, tolerant to wind speed and evergreen
tree species are suitable.
Eg: Mangifera indica, Tamarindus indica, Dalbergia sissoo
12. Bio-Aesthetic plantations: Growing of plants for beautification of the surroundings is
known as bio- aesthetic plantation. These are grown in different shapes. It beautifies the
unattractive areas.
Eg: 1. For shade purpose - Mangifera indica, Acasia indica, Tamarindus indica
2. For bole and crown shape - Michalea champaka, Saraca indica
3. Flowering trees – Delonix regia, Peltoforum, Casia fistula, Erythrina indica
LECTURE -5
PRINCIPLES OF NURSERY RAISING – TYPES OF FOREST
NURSERIES- SELECTION OF SITE OR NURSERY- MANAGEMENT
PRINCIPLES OF NURSERY RAISING:
1. Produce seeds to give healthy and vigorous plants
2. Production of seedlings for distribution among people
3. Produce seedling to give tall and sturdy plants which benefits in
a. control weed growth
b. can be grown along the highways
4. To facilitate growth of exotic species in indigenous climatic conditions, initial care can be
taken in the nursery itself.
5. Raising of species which do not produce the seeds give good results.
6. Plants to be grown on low fertile soils can be raised artificially in nursery.
7. Some forest species do not produce seeds every year and storage of seeds is difficult in some
species in such species raising of seedlings can be done in nursery.
Type of forest nurseries:
Nurseries are either temporary or permanent depending upon the duration of their use.
1. Temporary Nurseries: It is also called field nursery as it is always adjacent to the planting
area. These are established temporarily to meet the requirements of stock for difficult and limited
areas; as soon as the demand is met it is abandoned or shifted to another place.
Advantages:
a. Establishment of these nurseries in hilly areas provides opportunity to supply plants to
the difficult sites.
b. Reduction of transport charges as these are adjacent to the planting area.
c. Reduce the time from sowing in nursery beds to transplanting in main field.
Disadvantages:
a. Supervision is difficult as many as nurseries are located in a single sub-division.
b. Cost of production sometimes rises exponentially.
Permanent Nursery: Permanent nursery is established to supply nursery stock on a long term
basis. These are established in larger area and also have constant supervision. A permanent
nursery should have a large fenced area, road and inspection paths, well laid out irrigation
system and shading facilities.
Advantages:
a. Transportation of seedlings to all possible planting sites is easy.
b. The initial cost seems to be high as these are established on a long term basis.
c. Cost of production of seedlings in a permanent nursery is comparatively less.
d. Facilitates constant supervision.
On the basis of irrigation facility, nurseries are classified into:
1. Dry Nursery: A nursery that is maintained without any irrigation or other artificial
watering. These are not much succeeded and the plants which require negligible amount
of water are raised in this type of nurseries.
2. Wet Nurseries: A nursery that is maintained by irrigation or other artificial watering
during the dry months. These nurseries have permanent water source and facilitates to
raise seedlings in large quantity.
Selection of site: Careful consideration must be given to the selection of the nursery site. It is
difficult to provide all the congenial conditions at one place. The following factors influence
the site for a nursery:
Soil: Soil is the most important factor especially the physical properties of soil plays role
than that of chemical properties for successful production of plants. The fertile and well
drained soils with sandy loam texture, good tilth, medium to small blocky structure, pH
varying from 5.5 to 7.5, organic content at least of 2.5% should always be preferred for
nursery sites. Deep digging of clay soils is necessary since these do not have the proper
permeability and porosity. The site should be quite free from stones, pebbles or coarse gravel
as these restrict the root distribution.
Water supply: Sustained supply of water throughout the year must be available at the site.
Alkaline and polluted water should not be used for watering plants.
Natural Zonation: As far as possible nurseries should be established under the climatic
conditions where the different species are grown.
Transport: The nursery should be readily accessible all the year round in order to facilitate
transportation of materials required in the nursery and dispatch of seedlings from there.
Size of the Nursery: Size of the nursery depends on
1. Number of seedlings to be produced
2. Age of seedlings or transplants at the time of planting out
3. Type of nurseries (either temporary or permanent)
4. Spacing used in plantation.
Out of the total area laid out for a nursery only about 50% is available for sowing and
raising seedlings, the rest being occupied for permanent roads, inspection paths, irrigation
channels, heaps of organic matter, sand, etc.
Protection of Nursery Area: The nursery should be protected from the stray, wild animals.
The following protection measures have to be taken:
1. Fence with barbed wire should be erected at a height of 1.5 m.
2. Fence or stone wall around permanent nursery beds should be erected to protect from
grazing.
3. Wherever there is threat from elephants, trenches are to be dugged.
4. In dry area to protect the nursery beds from hot winds and high wind velocity it is better
to establish wind breaks and shelter belts.
5. Planting of thorny shrubs around nursery beds will protect the plants from birds.
Principles of Nursery Management:
1. Nurseries should be established near the planting area.
2. Permanent water source should be there at nursery area. Permanent shading to be provided
for shade loving plants.
3. Plants should be kept at least for one day at the planting site before planting to adopt for the
local climate.
4. Seedlings raised in nurseries will grow luxuriantly at outside environment.
LECTURE -6
PLANTING- DIGGING OF PITS BASED ON SOILS- PLANTING TYPES
Various sizes of pits will be dug depending upon the depth of soil and availability of
moisture. The usual sizes are 1x1x1 feet (30 cm x 30 cm x30 cm) and 2x2x2 feet (60 x 60 x 60)
cm3. When large polythene bags are to be used for planting, the size of the pits is enlarged
correspondingly.
1. Ordinary Pits: Ordinary pits are recommended for clayey and saline/alkaline soils in almost
all rainfall areas. The pits are dug on flat ground or levelled areas.
2. Saucer Shape Pits: Pits of 30 cm3 are dug at the planting site, seeds are dibbled or seedlings
are planted in the refilled pits. The area around the pit is scrapped to form a shallow saucer of
1 m radius. The saucer being deepest (15 cm) towards the centre where the plant is situated helps
in the effective trapping and conservation of moisture. The erection of a small ridge along the
edge of the saucer helps to contain the moisture collected within the saucer even in cases where
the land surface is slightly undulating.
3. Ring Pits: Ring pit is made in very sandy areas where moisture is the most critical factor for
survival of plants. In this case a circular trench about 20 cm away from the pit is made all
rounds. The depth of circular trench is from 30 cm to 40 cm. the circular trench collects rain
water for the plant. The crescent need not be very high, because deep planting will be necessary
in order to place the main mass of roots about 30 cm below the surface where the moisture
accumulation usually occurs in case of very sandy soils.
4. Ridge Ditch: Ridge ditch is a partly filled trench with a ridge along it. It is suitable for
sloping ground in which the ridge is always made on the lower side of the trench. Ridge is made
lower the slope whereas ditch is made at upper side of the slope.
5. Double Trenches: These are prepared in very stoney and slopy areas where the soil
availability is very less here and there in between the scattered stones, the water holding capacity
of the soil is extremely low. In this case, there is a provision for two trenches one filled in and
the other unfilled. The filled trench with worked up soil is used for planting and the unfilled
trench is kept for water storage and hence constructed on the upper side of the filled in trench.
Also suitable for murramy areas and where hard pan formation exists in sub soil.
6. Contour Trenches: Suitable for hilly areas.
7. Brick Planting: Suitable for sandy coastal areas. In desert sands and mobile sand dunes, the
sand dunes should be first stabilized by spreading leaf litter or brush wood etc.
8. Drainage: For successful plantation drainage channels should be opened in water logged areas.
Planting Methods:
1. Planting with roots: While planting with naked roots, the important considerations are
• Collar should be at the level of soil surface
• The tap and sinker roots are not doubled up
• The planting pits should be at least as deep as the length of roots of seedlings
2. Planting with ball of earth: Many species do not tolerate the exposure of the root system
especially when they grow large. Plant must be uprooted in such a way from the nursery that the
roots come out in natural position with ball of earth.
3. Container Planting:
a. Dona method of planting: Dona is a cup shaped structure made up of leaves of Bauhinia
vahlii and Butea monosperma. The donas are placed on the ground and watered after sowing
seeds until the seedlings are well rooted. The seedlings are then planted out.
b. Baskets: Baskets are made with bamboo strips or tamarix may be used as containers. These
are filled with soil and manure and seedlings are planted. Baskets may be buried into the soil
together with the plant while planting.
c. Polythene bags: These are most commonly used containers. The plants are developed with
minimum disturbance when used the polythene bags. The bottom of the bags is opened while
planting out. These are filled with soil and manure and planting out the seedlings.
4. Stump Planting: The advantages of stump planting are
• Practically no damage in transport
• Handling and planting are easy
• Lot of reserve food materials in stumps.
The stumps should be 20 – 25 cm. The root and shoot portions are about 18-20 cm and 2-
5 cm respectively.
Eg. Tectona, Sissoo, Albizzia species are planted by this method.
5. Vegetative Propagation: Various vegetative propagules like root suckers, branch and stem
cuttings, root cuttings, layering, grafting and budding are most commonly used for vegetative
propagation of forest plants.
LECTURE -7
TENDING OPERATIONS
Tending is a broad term which involves various types of operations needs to be done for
promotion of growth at different stages of development of crop after planting. Tending is an
important method of Silviculture. On most plantation sites, tending is mostly concerned with
preventing the plants from being suppressed by competing weed vegetation. Tending helps in
production of high quality timber as well as maximum timber production per unit area. The
following are some of the tending operations:
1. Irrigation: Watering is advisable to ensure establishment of avenue plantations. Incase of
block planting on village lands and in forest area it is better to plant a greater number to allow for
causality. In forest watering is rarely done as it is a costly operation.
2. Weeding: Weeding involves the removal / suppressing undesirable vegetation to reduce the
competition for light, water and nutrients with the forest crop a diameter of 1.5 m all around the
plant is cleared off. This operation is done once in a month.
3. Soil working: Loosening the soil around the plant and working up the soil around the plant in
order to prevent the moisture loss. Mulching with paddy straw, husk, twigs etc. also carried out
to prevent soil from hardening.
4. Fire tracing: A belt of 2 m. diameter cleaned on all sides of the plant will prevent any direct
damage from the fires whereas in block plantings a fire line of 4 meters width around the area
should be cleared, so that no fire enters the area.
5. Singling: singling is performed in the early stages of the life of a tree when it is 2-4 m tall,
whereby forked or multiple stems are reduced to a single stem to improve tree form and to
accelerate linear and straight growth.
6. Brashing or low pruning: Low pruning consists of the removal of lower branches with the
help of a saw when the trees attained 2nd or 3rd year. It should be done without damaging the
plant upto a height of 2 m or just after the time of canopy closure. This helps for straight and
better growth of the tree.
7. Climber cutting: Generally, fresh growth of vines, climbers are often profuse and fast which
cover the forest trees. The climbers are particularly harmful when trees are young. In older trees,
they constrict the stems and deteriorate the value of wood. It is desirable to launch early weeding
operations to include uprooting and grubbing of vines and creepers. When cutting vines,
a section of climber’s stem should be removed, simple severance is not sufficient as regrowth at
the cut end is fast. Following are some climbers which reduces the timber value
ex: Bauhinia vahli, Butea parkiflora, Vitis, Acasia
LECTURE -8
TEAK
Scientific Name: Tectona grandis
Family: Verbenaceae
Botanical Description: Teak is tropical, deciduous tall growing tree. It has small, fragrant white
flowers arranged in dense clusters at the end of the branches. The large papery leaves of are often
hairy on the lower surface. The canopy is round. Teak wood has leather like smell when it is
freshly milled and is particularly valued for its durability and water resistance.
Teak is one of the famous timber species of India as well as the globe. Teak wood is
known as the king. The wood is used for boat building, exterior construction, furniture, carving,
railway carriages and for construction of houses.
Distribution: Widely distributed in islands of India and Burma. It is naturalized and cultivated
in Central India, West Bengal, Assam, Bihar, Orissa and Andaman.
Climate: It prefers moist, warm tropical climate. It can withstand extremes of temperature but
maximum and minimum temperatures of 39-440C and 13-170C respectively are the most
favorable for its growth. It grows well in rainfall zone of 1200-2500 mm. Teak has been
classified as pioneer species as it requires a high light intensity for its growth and development.
Soil: Teak grows best on deep, well drained alluvial soils also grow on undulated lands. Good
drainage system should be established. The optimum pH range for better growth and quality is
6.5 – 7.5 and it can not tolerate high soil pH.
Important characters/ special features:
Teak has high resistance to fires and easily grazed by animals.Presence of “Tectol”
phenol in sap gives high resistance to sap wood rot and termites.As it is deciduous in nature, in
dry climate leaf fall starts from November-January months whereas in moist climate leaves
remain till March. Emergence of new leaves starts from April – June. Generally planting is taken
up during monsoon season. Fruiting starts from November and remains till January thereafter
fruits will drop down.
Propagation: Generally, teak is propagated through seeds but have low viability. Vegetative
propagation by soft wood cuttings is also practiced though coppice and pollard shoots are quite
effective in rooting. Teak has high coppicing capacity for longer duration.
Collection and storage of seeds: Collection of fruits starts from January – February and 1 kg. of
seed contains around 1200 – 3000 seeds.
Nursery practices: 2.5 -3 kg seeds are required to prepare for one mother bed and derived 1000-
1500 seedlings. Stumps are prepared out of seedlings that are of 2.5 cm long, collar (2-3 cm) and
22 – 23 cm of tap root.
Planting: Generally, initial spacing of 1.8 x 1.8 m , 2 x 2 m is followed depending on many
factors as site quality, cost of establishment, thinning regime, small wood utilization, planting
system etc.
Intercultural operations: Teak is a light demanding species and its growth and development are
reduced sharply under poor light conditions. Hence, intensive weeding is very necessary during
the early establishment of the plantation. i.e. 1-3 years.
Thinning: The first thinning is conducted in teak plantation at 5-10 years after planting of teak
depending on site quality and the size of initial spacing. Generally, under good site and close
spacing, the first and second thinning are conducted at 5 and 10 years respectively and continues
to 25-30 years. About 25% of the trees are left for further growth and development after the
second thinning. In fast growing plantations, thinning should be carried out for every 5 years.
LECTURE -9
NEEM
Scientific Name: Azadirachta indica
Family: Meliaceae
Native: India
Neem has been universally accepted as a “Wonder Tree” tree of 21st century. In India,
the tree is variously known as “Divine tree”, “Nature’s Drugstore” and Panacea for all
diseases”.
Description: Medium to large sized, evergreen, semi deciduous tree (under water stress
conditions, falls its leaves), grows upto 30 m tall and has 80 cm diameter. Bark smooth, fissured
and flaking in old woods, pinkish-brown, inner bark orange-red, with sticky foetid sap. Leaves
are alternate, imparipinnate. New growth initiates from February – March and the flowering
appear during April – May and bears fruits in the months of July – August.
Important characters:
• Neem responds well to sunlight but cannot tolerate to shade condition.
• Tender buds are susceptible to cold.
• Resistance to drought conditions.
• Susceptible to water logging conditions. Produces more shoots once the tree is cut down
• The interesting fact about neem tree is that it releases a higher amount of oxygen than
other trees during the day.
Distribution: In India, it grows in dry areas. In villages and in urban areas it grows as
avenue along the road side for shade purpose.
Climate: Normally it thrives in areas with sub – arid to sub-humid conditions, with an annual
rainfall between 400 – 1200 mm. It can tolerate high to very high temperatures but does not
tolerate temperature below 40C (leaf shedding and death may ensure).
Soil: Neem can grow in different type of soil ranging from shallow, deep and on well drained
sandy and laterite soils the suitable pH varies from 6.2 - 7.0.
Establishment:
Natural regeneration/ reproduction: Mature neem tree produce profuse seeds. Seed is
dispersed mainly by birds. Natural regeneration is plentiful under the protection of thorny
bushes and hedges. It also regenerates well by coppice and root suckers.
Artificial regeneration : Neem can be propagated by several methods, viz., direct sowing,
planting of young seedlings, stump planting, root and shoot cuttings. In these, sowing of
freshly collected seeds gives maximum regeneration.
Collection of seeds: Neem starts bearing from 5th year onwards. Well ripened fruits are
harvested during July – August and these are washed with water thoroughly to separate seed
from pulp. 1 kg of fruits contains 4500 seeds and these seeds are sown within 150 days. The
germination percentage varies from 70 %-90 %.
Method of sowing:
Direct sowing: In dry areas seeds are sown in the pits. In direct sowing seeds are sown at 33
m distance in rows. 3-4 kg of seed is required per hectare.
Transplanting: In nursery beds seeds are sown at 15-20 cm distance and 1 cm deep.
Germination takes place in 30 -45 days. After 3 months when the seedlings reach 7 – 10 cm
height are transplanted in the main field. In main field pits of 30 cm x 30 cm x 30 cm are
dugged at a distance of 3 m x 3m and 1 year old seedlings can be planted. Annual crops can
be grown to utilize the inter space.
Uses of Bark: Fibre extracted from the bark can be used for making ropes. Bark has
medicinal property and used in various preparations. Leaves contain the anti septic
properties.
Wood: Neem wood is blood red in colour and it has very strong and permanent nature.
Termites and other insects are not harmful for wood hence it is used for furniture and for
boats.
Oil: Neem seed contains 40 % of oils. Neem oil is used for pesticide preparation and also
in medicinal preparations.
Neem Cake: Neem cake contains higher Nitrogen and has pesticidal property hence it is
used as organic manure. Fresh or dried leaves are used in storage of grains to reduce the
attack of stored grain pests. Leaves also have the nematicidal property.
Varieties:
1. Hysudrica: This variety mainly grown in Himalayan regions.
2. Fruticosa: This is a shrub reaches up to 0.9 – 1.2 m height. Fruits are big in size and
oval shaped has 0.8 – 1.3 cm inner diameter.
BAMBOO
Scientific Name: Dendrocalamus strictus and
Bamboosa arundanaceae
Family: Poaceae
Bamboo is known in various names as Green Gold.
Description: Bamboo is perennial in nature. Culms are round at nodes. The basal portion of the
culm containing very short internodes which grows almost horizontally and remains at level to
the soil surface or little below it is known as rhizomes. The buds on rhizome nodes enlarge for
many months in the soil and tender shoots emerge as pointed cones completely covered with
imbricate sheaths from 50 to 60 days. Rains in May –July strongly induce sprouting. These
shoots elongate rapidly and in about 3-4 months the young culm grows to its full height before
branching.
Bamboo is used for several purposes hence it is known as “Poor man’s timber”. In Telangana
state, it is grown mainly in Khammam and Adilabad districts. It forms rich belt of vegetation in
moist deciduous, semi-evergreen, tropical, sub tropical and temperate forests.
Types:
1. Solid Bamboo (Dendrocalamus strictus): Bamboo does not possess any hollow.
2. Hollow Bamboo (Bambusa arundinacea): This kind of bamboo has hollow. Grows
straight without any curving and lighter in weight. Because of hollow it can be separated
and used for various purposes.
Climate: Bamboo is grown in tropical and sub tropical regions. It grows luxuriantly in moist
areas to an altitude of 1200 m from Mean Sea Level.
Soil: Bamboo can be grown in all type of soil however loamy soils are best suited. Saline and
acidic soils are not suitable. Soil pH of 6.5 – 7.5 is suitable.
Growing areas: Along the field bunds these are planted at 4 m distance whereas in plantations it
can be planted at a spacing of 5 m x 5m.
Planting: Pits of 30 x 30 x 30 cm are to be dugged, the dugout soil should be mixed with 4 kg of
farm yard manure before filling the pits. 50 g of 3 % folidal powder is applied to each pit. 1-2
years old seedlings are planted out early in July.
Cutting of bamboo: Seven (7) years after planting bamboo can be cut down leaving 50-75 cm
from the soil surface. Stubbles should be cleaned after the harvest. Care must be taken that below
7 years culms and, before drying of new growth cutting of bamboo should be avoided.
Intercultural operations: Cultivation of arid crops can be taken up in between the rows up to 2
years.
LECTURE -10
SUBABUL
Scientific Name: Leucaena leucocephala
Family: Legiminaceae
Origin: Central America
Description: It is one of the fast growing hardy evergreen species. Height depends on the types.
Generally Hawaiian types grows up to 5 m while Salvador types goes upto 20 m. leaves are
bipinnate, 15-20 cm long with 10-15 pairs of pinnate leaves. Inflorescence is globular and
flowers are white.
Types:
1. Hawaiian: The plants are short, bushy and remarkably drought tolerant grows up to 5m. It is
suited to hilly terrains in drought prone areas. It is a prolific seed producer and is good for fodder
purpose. Also used as fuel wood.
2. Peru: Medium to tall growing species grows up to 15 m. tall and extensively branching type
and ideal for fodder purpose.
3. Salvador: Tall, tree like and fast growing and having maximum annual biomass production.
This type possesses large leaves, pods and seeds than Hawaiian types. Responds to high
fertilization. Mainly it is grown for wood purpose.
Cunningham: It is a cross between Salvador and Peru types.
Hybrid types: Hawaiian Giant
Subabul is a vigorous coppice and responds well to pollarding, lopping and pruning. It
has deep and strong tap root and even the seedlings are deep rooted. It produces flowers and
fruits at a very early age. In the very first or second year in the case of Hawaiian type. It seeds
twice a year, July – November and February – May however the latter collection is better. Ripe
pods are collected before they open and spread to dry and stirred to separate seed. Each pod
contains 15-30 seeds. Unripe pods are greenish in colour and ripen ones are brown.
Characteristics:
1. Leucaena is a light demander, frost –tender, drought –resistant. Though prolonged
drought may kill the seedlings and young twigs. It tolerates shade to some extent.
2. Partially on clay soils it is a good coppice.
3. Stand repeated harvests of firewood, small timber and forage.
4. Produces plenty of seed in the very first or second year.
Distribution: Earlier types are growing naturally in East coast areas, while Hawaiian Giant is
being widely cultivated in most states under social forestry and agro-forestry schemes.
Climate: It grows best up to 500 m altitude, grows fairly up to 800 m in the tropical and sub
tropical belts. Can tolerate 400C but susceptible to frost. It can be grown successfully in areas
receiving annual rainfall of 250 mm to 600-700 mm. it is a good drought resistance species. It
grows well in areas of 100 m MSL.
Soil: It grows in various types of soils but neutral to slightly alkaline soils are fairly suitable but
difficult to survive in acidic soils.
Uses:
Firewood: Subabul wood is a good source of firewood and coal. Thermal energy of wood is
4200-4600 KJ/Kg and thermal energy of coal is 7000 kg calories per every 1 kg of coal.
Wood: Subabul wood is strong, hard, heavy and easily workable for a variety of carpentry
purposes. It makes cheap constructional timber used for poles, fence and posts.
Fodder: Leaves, pods, seeds are nutritious fodder and relished by cattle, sheep and goats.
However a toxic alkaloid mimosine/hyosine is present in leaves of some varieties that can be
injurious to cattle health. It is important to use lower mimosine strain. If the fodder contains
more than 50% mimosine, which is used for more than 6 months it is injurious to cattle health.
Other uses:
1. Its pulp is used in manufacture of paper in conjunction with long fibred bamboo pulp.
2. Pods yield a dye which is used to colour wool, cotton and fishing nets.
3. Powdered seed make good manure.
4. It is suitable foe afforestation of grass lands, denuded water sheds and hill slopes. It is also
used as wind breaker, fire breaks in agro-forestry plantings.
5. Due to the content of high nitrogen it is used as manure as well as mulch.
Establishment:
Natural Regeneration: Leucaena reproduces itself naturally through seed and coppice freely.
It seeds profusely and seeds get dispersed after spontaneous splitting of pods.
Artificial Regeneration: It can be raised artificially by direct sowing as well as planting out
seedlings entire from container or nursery beds.
Collection and storage of seeds: It produces seeds twice a year i.e. during July – November and
February – May. Seeds can be extracted by collecting and drying of pods. Seed is liable to insect
and fungal attack. Hence, seeds are treated with insecticides before storage. Seeds can be stored
as long as 8 -10 years. Each pod contains 15-30 seeds and 1 kg of seed contains around 20,000
seeds.
Seed treatment: Seeds are to be treated for obtaining early and good germination percentage.
For this seeds are presoaked for 48 hours in normal water. Seed coat is removed by knife, seeds
require inoculation with Rhizobium culture to ensure nodulation and nitrogen fixation. For this,
280 g culture is required for 20 kg of seed.
Direct sowing: Seeds are sown at 1-5 cm depth. Seed rate may be 10-20 kg/ha for line sowing
by following 2 x 3 m spacing. Spacing varies with planting objective. A closer spacing may be
followed for soil conservation and forage production than for timber, for which 3 x 3 m to 5 x 5
m spacing may be adopted. For forage, furrows may be as close as 75 cm and seeds dibbled 10
cm apart.
Nursery Techniques: Plants may be raised in nursey beds or in containers. Pretreated and
preferably inoculated seeds are sown in beds in March –April in lines spaced 30 cm apart and
seeds 5 cm apart in lines and about 1.2- 1.5 cm deep. Beds are irrigated regularly but lightly.
Germination commences in 4-6 days. Beds should be kept well weeded.
To raise the seedlings in containers, which may be polythene bags, bamboo pots etc. two
pretreated seeds are sown in each during March- April at a depth of about 1.5 cm and watered
regularly but lightly. Thinning is carried out to remain one plant for container. Seedlings attain to
plantable size by three months.
Planting: Pits of 30 cm3 are dug out during summer and planting may be taken up in the months
of June-July.
Intercultural operations: Regular weeding is necessary in nursery, natural regeneration areas as
well as in plantations in early stages. Thinning may be carried out later to the desired intensity.
Management of plantations:
• Plantations can be harvested for every 2-5 years depending on variety and objectives of
management. Firewood plantations can be worked on 2-3 years in coppice rotations
method, irrigated timber plantations on a 6 year rotation. By cutting close to the ground
for every 5 years, it has remained in vigorous conditions for 55 years. For forage purpose,
cutting height may be as low as 10-15 cm at frequencies of 1-3 months depending on
growth rates.
• Due to faster growth and high nitrogen fixation it can be planted as legume crop. In
coffee, tea and rubber plantations it is used for alley cropping. It is also used as wind
break to check soil erosion.
• Growth rate: Growth and yield vary widely according to variety, site factors, spacing and
management. Height growth may exceed 4 m per year initially, attaining up to 20 m in 5
– 6 years.
Yield: In dry land areas, as average of 12-24 ton of charcoal can be produced per hectare.
Fodder yield of 25 -30 ton per hectare can be obtained per one year.
EUCALYPTUS
Scientific Name: Eucalyptus tereticornis
Family: Myrtaceae
Eucalyptus is native to Australia.
Description: It is a tall tree with stout trunk, attains a height of 50 cm. It is an evergreen,
glabrous tree usually secreting an aromatic gum. The leaves and flowers contain conspicuous oil
glands. White coloured flowers are borne in umbels usually pedunculate. Calyx tube encloses
the ovary which is covered with a deciduous operculum. Fruit consisting of the enlarged calyx
tube is usually hard and woody, full of resin sacs. Bark is grey, exfoliating in long flakes.
Special features: Eucalyptus is a light demander. It produces good coppice freely and
vigorously.
Climate: It grows up to an altitude of 500 m. it is sensitive to frost. It grows in alluvial, black
cotton, gravelly, lateritic, skeletal rocky and murram soils even on shifting sand dunes. It comes
well in plains receiving a rainfall of 800 – 1000 mm.
Soil: Deep, fertile and well drained loamy soil gives best growth. The tree prefers sandy loam to
loamy soils within a pH range of 6.0 -7.5.
Nursery raising: Seeds are viable upto three months. Seeds are sown in raised beds. seeds are
mixed with sand and broadcasted over the bed then cover with thin layer of soil.
Planting: six months old seedlings are used for planting.
Utilization: Eucalyptus wood is the main raw material for paper industry. It is used for making
packing cases. Leaves contain oil. Bark yields oxalic acid. It is preferred by the farmers by
virtue of several characters like fast growth, non browsable, immunity to pest and diseases and
good coppicing ability.
LECTURE - 11
TAMARIND
Scientific Name: Tamarindus indica
Family: Leguminaceae
Distribution: Tamarind is native to dry savanna of tropical Africa. In ancient times it was
introduced to Asia by Arab traders. In India, it is widely grown in rural areas along the road side.
In South India, it grows naturally.
Description: It is an evergreen tree grows up to 24 m tall and 7 m in girth with round canopy.
The bark is brownish or dark grey and fissured longitudinally and horizontally. Leaves are
paripinnate and 15 cm long. Leaflets vary from 10-20 pairs, oblong. Flowers are borne in small
terminal, drooping racemes on current season’s growth. Pods are 7.5 – 20 cm long, 2.5 cm broad
and 1 cm thick, more or less constricted between the seeds, slightly curved, brownish – ash in
colour.
Climate and Soil: Tamarind is tropical tree. The maximum temperature varies from 36- 470 C
and the absolute minimum temperature varies from 0-17.50 C. Rainfall required for its successful
growth is 500 – 1500 mm. It can be grown on variety of soils ranging from poor degraded,
eroded, gravelly, saline and alkaline soils. Growing in deep loamy soils gives better productivity.
To some extent it tolerates alkalinity and salinity.
Propagation: It is propagated through seed and air layering methods. Softwood grafting can
also be practiced.
LECTURE -12
KARAKKAYA
Scientific Name: Terminalia chebula
Family: Combretacae
Parts used: Dried immature fruits( generally the fruit rind)
English Name: Chebulic myroban
Vernacular names: Abhayam, Haritaki, Jayashta Pasya, Amrutha, Kayashta, Hemavathi, Shiva,
Jeevanthi.
Uses:
• It possesses a great therapeutic value and is widely distributed in India. Uses of its
varieties with their sources, identifying features and therapeutic uses mentioned in
ayurveda., Unani and Homeopathic medicine due to its wide spectrum of
pharmacological activities associated with the biologically active ingredients.
• Fruit has the properties of antiseptic, diuretic, astringent, cardiotonic and febrifuge in
action.
• It is a safe and effective purgative, laxative. It is an important ingredient of ‘triphala’ an
ayurvedic formulation used in the treatment of constipation, colic pain and kidney
dysfunctions, eye diseases and sore throat.
• Unripe fruits are more purgative and the ripe ones are astringent.
Description: Chebulic myrobalan is a large tree with umbrella shaped crown and crowded
branches, growing up to 25 m height with a bole girth of 2.5 m. bark is dark brown colour.
Leaves are sub opposite, ovate or oblong- ovate and deciduous during cold season. The species is
identified by dark brown exfoliating in irregular woody scales and the presence of a pair of large
glands at the top of the petiole. Flowers are yellowish-white and emit a strong offensive odour.
Fruit is drupe, yellowish-green, obovoid or ellipsoid, hard and 5-6 ribbed when dry.
Varieties: Vijaya, Rohini, Poothana, Amrutha, Abhaya, Jeevanthi, Chetaki.
Soil: It can be grown on a wide range of soils from loam to lateritic soils with moderate fertility.
The plant attains the best development on loose, well drained soil. Average temperature ranging
Climate: The tree is a strong light demander. It requires direct overhead light and cannot tolerate
shade of cramped situation. It is frost hardy and drought resistant to a considerable extent.
Temperature between 36 – 450C and rainfall ranges from 1200 – 3000 mm between 10-48 0C is
suitable for its good growth.
Propagation: It is propagated by seed. Good quality seed can be collected as soon as they fall
on the ground during May –June and are dried under shade. The seeds can be stored in gunny
bags for one year but fresh seeds germinate quicker.
Nursery Technique:
Raising propagules: The saplings are raised from seeds in a nursery in July with the onset of
monsoon season. About 5 kg seeds are required for raising plants in 1 hectare of land. The
depulped seeds should be either treated by fermentation process for a period of 15-20 days or
presoaked in water for a period of two days before sowing. Those seeds may be sown in prepared
beds or polybags.
Land preparation: the land is tilled and leveled properly to make it porous and friable. Pits of
60 cm3 are dug at a spacing of 6 x 6 m. the soil of each pit is mixed with 15 kg FYM and a
mixture of NPK @ 75:30:30 g and refilled before transplanting of seedlings.
Intercropping: Since it is a long term crop, intercropping with short duration crops are
preferable particularly with climbers and shade loving crops like Turmeric, Zinger.
Aftercare: for the first three to four years organic manure (FYM) @ 3 kg per plant is applied per
pit. During the initial years it is necessary to keep the plantation weed free. Irrigation is required
for the initial 3-4 years depending on the soil moisture and season. The plants may be irrigated at
least once a week in summers.
Harvesting: Flowering and fruiting commences after 8-10 years of planting in the summer
season. The tree lives for more than 50 years and continue to yield fruits every year. The
collected fruits are well dried in shade for a few days, with moisture content less than 10% and
stored in well ventilated containers in a cool room.
Chemical constituents: the main constituents in the fruit are anthraquinone, glycoside,
chebulic acid, tannic acid (20 -40%), mucilage, carbohydrates, amino acids, phosphoric acid and
vitamin C.
Yield: On an average 40-50 kg of dry fruits /tree/year are obtained after it attains six years of
age.
LECTURE -13
JATROPA
Scientific name: Jatropa curcas
Family: Euphorbiaceae
Origin: Tropical America
Jatropa is a small tree like shrub. It grows in different climatic conditions. Its natural habitation
found in Eastern Ghats mainly the hills of Vishakapatnam, Vizayanagaram, Srikakulam and
Khammam.
Characteristics: it is a small tree or shrub with smooth grey bark, profusely branched from main
stem grows up to 6 m height. Leaves are green to pale-green, alternate to suboppsite, 10-15 cm
length, 7-12 cm width, 3-5 lobed with a spiral phyllotaxis. Inflorescence is formed in the leaf
axil. Yellowish green flowers are formed terminally, individually with female flowers usually
slightly larger and flowering occurs in March – April, September – October months. Fruits are
ovoid shape, when it ripens the colour changes from green to yellow colour. Seeds resembles as
castor seeds, 1.8 – 2.0 cm long and ovoid in shape with black coloured layer.
Climate and soil: Jatropa can be grown in medium to dry arid and semi arid regions with annual
rainfall of about 500 – 1200 mm. it can grow at an altitude of about 500 m with the average
temperature of 20 0 C. Frost will affect the young plants and severe cold can defoliate the plant
and destroy the trees. High temperature and humidity hastens the germination.
Various soils ranging from rocky, red, sandy, crevices of rocks are suitable for its successful
growth.
Propagation: Jatropa is successfully propagated through seed and stem cuttings. When it is
propagated through stem cuttings which lack tap root and contains adventitious root system and
hence growth is restricted in arid regions.
Nursery Management: Collection of good quality seed is important. For raising seeds,
polythene bags of 5 x 9 cm size, 200 gauge are required. These polythene bags are filled with
soil, sand, FYM in 3:2:1 proportion. Seeds are presoaked in water for 12 hours and heavy seeds
are selected then the seeds are sown in poythene bags during February – March. Watering is
given twice a day up to one week. It takes 5-6 days for germination. After 2 months, watering is
given for every 2 days. Seedlings reach a height of 35-45 cm within three months. When the
roots come out from the bottom of the bag these are planted after 10-15 days in the main field.
Stem cuttings are also placed in the polythene bags and watering is given every day. Plantlets are
ready for transplanting within three months. Transplanting can be done in the month of June.
Land preparation: It grows in marginal lands or rocky soils hence thorny shrubs should be
removed thereafter ploughing is done across the slope to increase the water infiltration rate.
Digging of pits: Pits of 30 cm x 30 cm x 45 cm are dugout during summer months. For rainfed
cultivation pits are spaced at 2 m x 2 m to accommodate 2,500 plants per hectare. If intercrops
are grown, the pits are spaced at 3 m x 2 m.
LECTURE -14
PONGAMIA (PUNGAM)
Scientific Name: Pongamia pinnata
Family: Leguminaceae
Description: Full grown pongamia is a medium sized tree grows up to 18 feet with trunk
diameter of more than 50 cm, trunk is generally short with stout branches and spreading thick
crown. The bark is thin, smooth, grey and yellowish inside. Leaves are imparipinnate, glabrous
and light green, leaflets are opposite, without stipules, 5-12 cm long and shortly acuminate.
Inflorescence is raceme, flowers are pink or purple in colour. Pods are indehiscent, turgid almost
woody pointed at ends, 4-5 cm long and 1.7 – 3.2 cm width. Seed is compressed, wrinkled,
reddish brown and oily.
Growing areas: Pongamia grows throughout the greater part of the country chiefly along
streams and rivers and in beach and tidal forests. It is considered to be a native of the Western
Ghats. In South India it grows from Eastern side of Ravi river to an altitude of 1200 m MSL
and in Himalayas up to an altitude of 610 m MSL. Under the shade of this tree, grass is grown
luxuriantly hence it has been widely planted in different parts of the country ranging from river
banks to low rainfall areas viz., Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh are the growing states.
Climate and Soil: Its wide distribution in the country shows that it can adapt itself to a spectrum
of climatic conditions. An area receiving 500 -2500 mm rainfall and temperature varies between
27 to 380C are suitable.
It can be grown on a wide variety of soils, ranging from sandy to black cotton soils even
on sandy , alkaline soils but it grows best on deep and well drained alluvial soils with abundant
supply of soil moisture. It tolerates drought and alkaline conditions too.
Propagation: Pongamia can be successfully propagated through seed, stem cuttings and
Grafting.
a. Through seed: Pod collection is done by beating the branches or from ground. Seeds are
sown during July – August months in well prepared nursery beds or in polythene bags of 20 x 15
cm or directly sown in the main field. Presoaking of seeds in 30 ppm IBA solution for 24 hours
hastens the germination percentage. To get quality seedlings, nursery beds should be mixed with
fertile soil, sand and FYM in 2:1:1 ratio.
b. Through stem cuttings: Stem cuttings of 1-2 cm diameter and 15-25 cm length are to be
prepared from healthy plants. For better rooting, cuttings are to be dipped in 800 ppm IBA or
NAA solution.
c. Layering/grafting: Karanja can be propagated through air layering and cleft grafting. In
cleft grafting, one year old rootstocks are used. Size and girth of the stock and scion should be
same. Softwood of rootstock is split longitudinally in the middle in the form of cleft to a length
of 4-5 cm downward with sharp knife. The cleft looks like a fork or letter ‘V’. Scion is prepared
by giving a cut gently sloping wedge of about 5 cm by removing the bark and liitle wood from
opposite sides of scion. The wedge shaped scion thus prepared is inserted in the ‘V’ shaped slit
of the stock. After insertion, the joint is tied firmly with polythene film. After 15 days new
growth will be observed at union and these give grafts produce healthy plants.
Nursery Management:
Seed: Fresh seeds are to be sown in the nursery beds by following a spacing of 7.5 cm x 15 cm.
Seeds are sown during monsoon season in July-August months seeds are sown in polythene
bags. Germination starts from 10-30 days after sowing.
Planting: One year old seedlings which attain a height of about 50-60 cm are planted out. Pits of
60 cm3 are dug for planting and filled with soil and 5 kg of farm yard manure. A spacing of 5 m
between rows and 4 m between plants is adopted.
Stem cuttings of 60 cm length, stump and suckers can also be used for planting. These are
planted during June-July and three irrigations are given per year.
Inter crops: in the initial 4-5 years after planting, short duration crops like oil seeds, pulses,
mustard, ground nut, sesame, Bengal gram, cow pea, horse gram, beans, bajra and
sorghum can be grown successfully.
Flowering and Fruiting: Flowering season remains from April to June. Flowers are white, pink
or light purple in color. Plants raised from seeds takes 5-6 years for fruiting whereas grafted
plants starts fruiting four years after planting. Mature pods ripen during December – January and
each tree yields about 8-24 kg of seed.
Collection of seed and processing: When fruiting is considered it is not uniform in karanja.
Pods are collected by beating the branches or from ground. Then the pods are dried in the sun,
thrashed to extract the seeds from machine and seeds are dried for 2-3 days. Seed yield of 40-90
quintals can be obtained from one hectare.
Seed characters: Seeds are reddish brown in colour. Dried seed contains 19% moisture, 27-
39% oil, 17.4% protein, 6.6 % starch, 7.3% fibre, 2.3% ash. Seeds also contain 13.5% gum
and essential oils and an amino acid called glabrin.
Physical and Chemical characteristics of Pongam oil: Karanj oil is popularly known as
pongum oil. Freshly extracted oil is yellowish to brown in colour. Solvent extraction method
gives good quality oil than ordinary extraction methods.
a) Characteristics of oil:
Odour Characteristic odd odour
Colour Yellowish red
Density 0.924 gm/cc
Refractin index (at 400C) 1.434- 1.4790
Specific gravity (at 300C) 0.925- 0.940
Iodine value 80-96
Saponification value 184-189
Unsaponifiable matter 2.9
b) Fatty Acid composition
Palmitic Acid 3.7-7.9 % 11.65%
Stearic Acid 2.4-8.9 % 7.50%
Oleic Acid 44.5- 71.3% 51.59%
Linoleic Acid 10.8-18.3% 16.64%
Lignociric Acid 1.1-3.5% -
Eicosanoic Acid 9.5- 12.4% 1.35%
Aracidic Acid 2.2-4.7%
Oudhanic Acid 4.2-5.3%
Uses of Pongamia pinnata:
1. Pongamia is used for aesthetic purpose in gardens and as avenue along the roads for shade and
fragrant flowers.
2. Dried leaves and flowers are used as manure. Bark is used in rope making. Black gum
extracted from bark is used against wounds caused by poisonous fishes.
3. Dried leaves act as insecticides. Leaves can be used as green manure and to control
Nematodes. Fresh leaves also serve as fodder.
4. Karanj oil has insecticidal property. (Bacillus anthrasis, B. pulilus, E. coli, Pseudomonas
mangifera, Salmonella typhi, Sarsina lutea, stephylococus albus, stephylococus aurius,
Xanthomonas campestris)
5. Due to hard nature of the timber it can be used for making furniture and wheels of bullock
cart. Timber also serves the purpose of fuel wood and fire wood.
6. After extraction of oil from seed, oil cake is used as manure and it can be mixed with poultry
feed.
7. Oil has bitter taste and brown colour. Presence of non edible oil (27%) is used in
manufacturing of soaps, varnishes, paints, for lighting of lamps and it also serves as the
control of skin diseases.
8. Juice extracted from leaves is useful in control of cough, diarrhea, indigestion, gastric, leprosy
diseases. Roots are used for tooth cleaning and gums. Seed powder is used as remedy for fever,
dry cough. Flowers act against diabetis while the bark is used for treatment of beri-beri.
9. In Ayurveda, karanja ash is used for healthy tooth, to treat ear problems, chest pain, back pain.
Oil is used for the treatment of fever, ailment for skin diseases.
LECTURE -15
SOCIAL FARM FORESTRY
Wide spread loss of tree vegetation in the developing countries in the past few decades
led to the emergence of social forestry. This approach of social forestry is to meet the problem of
fuel scarcity, other forest products and to preserve the environment with the participation of rural
people who would plant, tend and maintain trees by themselves.
Social forestry was first recognized as an important component of forestry development
and meeting the rural need in the Interim Report of the National Commission on Agriculture
on social forestry, 1972. The commission stressed on the socioeconomic importance of social
forestry for rural community as well as in the management of forest resources. It was felt that by
taking up the programme of raising of trees, grasses and fodder in the farmers own lands, village
commons, wastelands and degraded forests close to habitations, it would be possible to meet the
requirements of fuel wood, fodder, small timber for rural housing and agricultural implements.
Objectives of Social Farm Forestry:
1. Create awareness among the people about tree growing and develop interest on tree growing.
2. To supplement the production of fuel wood and small timber to meet the increasing
requirements of local people.
3. Development of small scale industries at village level.
4. Fuel wood supply to the rural area and replacement of cow dung, expansion of agricultural
crops.
5. To grow trees in urban areas for recreational purpose.
6. Growing of tree belt around industries in order to reduce air and sound pollution.
7. Development of every piece of land to benefit the farmers to get high returns.
8. To increase the land value and to grow trees to provide shelter to the people
9. To achieve the rural development in all the ways.
10. To supplement the timber requirement of industries by growing at social farm forestries
11. To help the people for upliftment of the economy
12. To supply raw material required for need based industries
13. To bring the unutilized saline soils into agricultural lands
14. To grow the trees in eroded soils to bring them into agricultural lands
According to the statistics the current area under forest cover is about 75 m ha. The
estimated area under forests is to be 33% of the total land area to balance the environment
though the area under forests is around 22.8%.
Reasons for forest degradation:
1. To meet the fuel wood demand of the rural people they solely depend on forests. About 75%
of the fuel wood is met from the forests.
2. Grazing of animals in protected areas also a reason for degradation of forests.
Types of Social Farm Forestry practices in different areas:
In areas like saline, gravel, submerged and runoff, forests can be grown with proper care
and maintenance. In such areas plant species are to be selected on soil and climate and proper
management practices are to be followed in order to improve the fertility status of the soils.
LECTURE -16
VANAMAHOSTHAVAM
Planting of trees once in a year is known as Vanamahosthavam. It has been stared in the year of
1950 by the agricultural and food minister Sri K.V. Munshi. The main objective of this
programme is, planting of trees in fields, private, public compounds, along the road sides, around
the digs wherever the open land is available. Generally, this programme starts in the month of
June –July. This programme not only meant for planting of trees particularly on that day, it
involves the management and growth of trees. Frequent examination of officials of central
Government provides trophy in the name of Jawahar, Rajendra, Sardar Patel,Munshi to the
people who take up the planting, best village, District, organization and University to promote
the tree plantations.
Main objectives:
1. To achieve the environmental / ecological balance by extending the area under tree planting
2. Fuel wood, fodder and wood for agricultural implements etc. and planting of trees for the
small based timber products
3. Employment generation during the offseason
4. Control of soil erosion by planting of trees
5. Development of deteriorated lands by planting of trees
6. Production of food and other small scale forest based products for rising the socio-econoical
level of the rural people
Planting of trees:
At first, thorny shrubs, weeds, stubbles should be removed ploughing can be done as per
need in the selected land for planting. Pits of 30 x 30 x 45 cm are to dugged during the months of
May – June and the number of pits per acre may depend on the species to be planted.
Spacing between pits is to be 2-4 m from all the sides. 4 kg farm yard manure, ½ kg neem cake,
50 g DAP, 50 g 3% Lindane powder and required quantity of black soil is application for each
pit. Thereafter planting can be taken up during June-July months.
Management of social forests:
Manures: After the onset of monsoon, 100 g of DAP should be applied twice, one during the
month of July and the second application during the month of December. The same application
dosage is continued till two years.
Water management: after planting, if the dry situation prevails for 2-3 weeks watering
should be given to each plant by any one of the method. During summer months, for every 15-20
intervals watering is to be given for 7-8 times depends on the requirement.
Weed management: Regular weeding operations are to be carried out for better growth of the
plants.
Trimming /cutting of branches: Removal of side branches is to be done to allow the upright
growth of the plants.
Moisture conservation methods: Majority of the forests grown in light and less fertile soils
which have less moisture holding capacity. Due to this, it is necessary to conserve the moisture.
Paddy husk, jalashakti chemical or earthen pots are different moisture conserving materials
which are available at cheaper cost. Earthen pots which releases the water drop by drop
conserves more moisture for longer period.
Paddy husk is applied at 8 cm thickness at the base of the plants helps in the conservation
of moisture for longer time. For every three weeks watering is given to the plants when husk is
used for moisture conservation. To avoid the husk from termites 50 g 3% lindane powder is
applied at the basins. Husk not only conserves the moisture, also helps in the checking of weed
growth and it serves as organic manure by decomposition process.
LECTURE -17
ENERGY PLANTATIONS
These include high technology electricity from nuclear fuels to rurally available Energy
continues and will continue to play a vital role in the world’s economic development. India like
many developing countries, consumes energy in a variety of biological products like fuel wood,
agricultural residues and animal dung. The available fuels come into two classes, coal, oil and
electricity constitute commercial sources, while fuel wood, agricultural residues and animal dung
are non- commercial sources of energy. Natural energy forms i.e. forest and trees have supplies
fuel wood to produce light, heat energy since the dawn of civilization. Few decades ago, wood
was the main source of energy both for domestic and industrial uses all over the world. The oil
crisis and rapid depletion of fossil fuels have focused on the need to develop and better manage
the sources of energy. M.S. Swaminathan has approached in the introduction to the report of the
fuel wood study committee, 1982 of the planning commission has pointed out, India is
bestowed with abundant sunlight which provides enormous opportunities for harnessing this
energy through the photosynthetic pathway of biomass production. Biomass being a renewable
organic matter a product of biological conversion of solar energy is likely to play a strategic role
in the future in view of the particular attention being given to plantations as a dependable
renewable source. The sixth five year plan outlined a detailed strategy for self reliance in the
energy sector. The plan had made a special provision for the establishment of energy plantation
and emphasis has given to harnessing the sources of energy to meet the energy requirement of
rural communities.
An energy plantation is one that is grown purely for plant material for their fuel value
than for fibre content. For efficient utilization of solar light for biomass production it is important
to select choice of species and planting site. This concept is based on the principle that yield of
dry matter of certain fast growing species of forest is independent of spacing. In energy
plantations it is necessary to select fast growing plants with very close spacing of less than one
meter and short rotations of 3 to 4 years. Energy plantations can be taken up in open places with
annual, perennial trees or with shrubs for year round. The biomass obtained from these plants
can directly be used as fuel. The available alternatives for securing land for energy plantations,
diversion of agricultural land in the food surplus areas for energy plantations, diverting marginal
and wastelands, planting on boundaries of agricultural holdings, community lands, roadsides,
canal banks and sides of railway lines. These energy plantations will serve as alternative source
to meet the fuel wood demand of rural people.
Selection of village and place: before taking up the energy plantations it is necessary to select the
right place and the size i.e. quantity of the plantation.
The choice of place depends on household needs, soil characters and market demands.
These can plant in marginal and wastelands. If these are used as wind breaks, selection of site
depends on the protection to be provided for buildings, lands, orchards, grasslands.
The size of the plantation varies from small to large and it also depends on the size of the
land. Generally, the size of the plantation is to 1/3 rd of the total land available.
Properties of fuel wood:
1. The value of a wood as fuel depends mainly on its combustibility (i.e. regardless with
which it catches fire and having caught fire, continues to burn until only the ash remains).
2. Heating power or calorific value (calorific value is the quantity of heat emitted by a given
weight of wood during the process of combustion).
3. The overall efficiency of wood utilization depends upon the moisture content of the fuel.
Freshly cut wood contains about 23-25% moisture. About 8-9% moisture is just
enough for domestic wood burning stoves.
4. The heartwood possess high heat value than the sapwood as it contains greater
concentration of organic substances such as tannins, salts etc.. that enhances the heat
value.
5. Hardwoods are better fuel woods than soft woods, as the former gives out more lasting
and uniform heat and are therefore preferred for domestic use.
6. Freedom from smoke, crackling and sparking, ease and completeness of combustion,
rapidity of burning etc. must also be considered for selection of species for fuel wood
plantations.
LECTURE 18
FARM FORESTRY- DEFINITION, SCOPE- COMMERCIAL AND NON
COMMERCIAL FARM FORESTRY
Farm Forestry can be defined as growing trees on farm lands for commercial, purposes
like timber production or variety of non commercial purposes like ground water control, soil
erosion control, etc.
Objectives of Farm Forestry:
1. To meet the demand of organic fertilizers
2. Increase of productivity through balanced fertilizer use and Reduction of soil erosion
3. To meet fodder demand and wood for preparation of small agricultural implements
4. To protect the crop from dry winds and reduction of extremities of weather conditions
5. Increase of ground water table
6. Reduction of Soil erosion
7. Use of FYM to improve soil fertility status
Advantages of Farm Forestry:
1. Production of quality timber products
2. Increases farm income
3. Environmental benefit
4. Promotes afforestation
5. Supports community development
Farm Forestry- Principles for the Success:
1. Selection trees which are deciduous, erect growing, with small canopy otherwise Kharif
grown plants will not grow satisfactorily
2. Use implements to cut the roots which otherwise will compete with the crop plants
3. Grow the trees with large canopy and fruit trees around wells, tanks, farm buildings and
human habitats
4. Take up timely sprayings to control pests and diseases
5. Grow small canopy trees in saline affected areas which prevent the bird habitat
Selection of Tree species suitable for Farm Forestry:
1. Fast growth
2. Good timber quality
3. High calorific value
4. Easy method of Propagation
5. Less cost of management for the production
6. Easy availability of seed
7. Permit the adoption of new technology
Eg. Acacia sp., Albizzia lebek, Azadirachta indica, Cassia siame, Casuarina equisitifolia,
Dalbergia sisoo, Eucalyptus globules, Zizypus Spp.
Types of Farm Forestry:
1. Commercial farm Forestry: Areas near to the market area will be selected and the
Farmers grow the trees on a commercial scale. These are near to road ways, rail ways and
water ways. The type has the following characteristics
a. Finance viability: Cost of production include labour cost, input and material cost and
management practices involved in rising the tress while, Returns include growth rate
of trees and yield. These farmers have better management ability to have have better
returns which is an indication of finance viability.
b. Input levels: Progressive farmers get the better returns by way of :
i. Taking up Forestry in fertile soils
ii. Timely supply of water and irrigation
iii. Demand based utility of labour force
iv. Sale during the time which fetches better market price
2. Non Commercial farm Forestry:
These areas are far away from the market. These will be taken up where there are too
high or too low temperatures. Small and marginal farmers can not afford to have high
input levels. However, they go for low input levels.
i. Farmers look for other enterprises and do not grow trees in fertile areas
ii. Soils with poor fertility will be utilised for growing trees
iii. Farmers can not wait for longer periods to reap the harvest
iv. Due to high risk in commercial farm forestry, these farmers will not come forward
to take up the risk.
LECTURE -19
WIND BREAKS AND SHELTER BELTS- IMPORTANT POINTS- TYPE OF
PLANTING- ADVANTAGES
The term wind break refers to one or two rows of protective planting of trees whereas
shelterbelts is a line of trees or shrubs planted to protect an area, especially a field of crops from
fierce weather.
Importance of Wind Breaks and Shelter Belts:
Windbreaks form efficient soil protection against wind erosion particularly at the time
when soil cover is not protected by the cultivated plant vegetation cover. Strong winds may
cause 70% to 100% of a crop to be lost or damaged. Windbreaks may reduce wind speed by 60
to 80%. Other benefits include the generation of a favourable microclimate for plant
development and reduction of wind erosion. As a result of scarce vegetation cover that can alter
the movement of wind, dry land areas are predominantly windy.
Shelter belts established for the purpose 1) to deflect air currents 2) to reduce the
velocity of winds 3) to provide general protection to the leeward areas against the effects of wind
erosion 4) to protect the leeward areas from desiccating effects of hot wind.
Generally in our country the windbreaks are planted in North – South direction to meet the
wind forces from Southwest and Northeast.
Properly designed shelterbelts have shown the effect over a distance of 40 times the
height of the windbreak. There are two zones in a shelterbelt 1) a triangular quiet zone starting
from to of the windbreak and extending near to the ground level of a distance of 8 h (i.e. 8 times
the height of the windbreak), where the turbulence velocity fluctuations of wind are reduced and
below the values of approach flow. 2) above and downwind of the quiet zone is a wake zone
where the turbulent fluctuations are greater than those in approach flow.
The degree of protection offered by a windbreak depends upon the orientation, height,
density, species composition and spacing of the windbreak.
1) Orientation: To achieve maximum effectiveness, windbreaks should be oriented as close to
perpendicular (90 degrees) to the prevailing or problem winds as possible. To allow for changes
in wind direction windbreaks are often planted I multiple directions such as L, U or E shapes.
2) Height: A windbreak protects a distance from 2 to 10 times it’s height. So a 5 m high
windbreak would protect a distance up to 50 meters away. The best windbreaks are multi-layered
comprising various trees to block wind at multiple heights.
3) Density: The density of a windbreak determines how effective it is at reducing the speed of
the wind. Moderately dense windbreaks significantly reduce the wind velocities (50-60%).
Windbreaks with lower densities are generally ineffective for most crop protection purposes. The
moderately dense windbreaks do not cause, as much downwind turbulence as dense windbreaks,
hence they are more effective.
4) Species selection: The most desirable plants for a variety of field windbreaks are those that
have a density of about 50-80% in single row planting. Their spread not exceeding 3 m and
should and should have a potential height of 5-30 m. Tall, narrow crowned species usually
provided the greatest benefit for the amount of land taken out of production. Casuarina,
Eucalyptus, Sesbania, Parkinsonia aculeate are highly suitable wind breaks.
5) Spacing: In general, within the row spacing is 1 - 2.5 m for shrubs, 1.5 – 2.5 m for small
trees, 2 – 6 m for medium to tall trees. Normally the spacing between the rows varies from 2-6
m.
Characteristics of tree species suitable for wind breaks
1. Resistance to drought.
2. Resistance to frost and wind throw i.e., should be deep rooted.
3. Tolerance to temperature extremes.
4. Easy to establish and long lived.
5. Fast growing with tall uniform shape.
6. Resistance to pests and diseases.
7. Should not serve as alternate host for fungi, insects and other pests.
Advantages of windbreaks and shelterbelts:
1. Shelterbelts have influence on agricultural crops by preventing soil erosion and by modifying
microclimate of the fields. Changes in air temperature and soil temperature are moderate.
2. They reduce wind velocity and consequent movement of the sand and soil is arrested.
3. At higher wind velocities, the activity of stomatal apparatus tends to be decreased, the belts
create more favorable conditions for the plant growth in the sheltered area.
4. They slow down the wind and conserve precipitation.
5. Dewfall in sheltered areas has been found to be 200% greater than on exposed ground.
6. The increase in soil moisture content on the protected areas varied from 0.3 to 7.8%.
7. Shelterbelts also protect the cattle from the ill effects of hot and cold winds.
8. Shelterbelts can protect orchards as they reduce wind damage to flower and fruits.
9. Shelterbelts supply fuel and also increase the bird population, which kills the pests.
10. Fruit production is enhanced in the leeward side of windbreaks and shelterbelts.
LECTURE -20
AGROFORESTRY- DEFINITION- TYPES- ADVANTAGES
Agroforestry is a sustainable land management system which increases the overall yield
of the land, combines the production of crops (including tree crops) and forest plants and /or
animals simultaneously or sequentially on the same unit of land and applies management
practices that are compatible with the cultural practices of the local population (King & Chander,
1978).
Thus agro-forestry system is an integrated system in which the cultivator works in a tree-
crop-livestock system. It is symbiosis of tree growing, crop production and livestock raising
none of the practices being detrimental to any other, but in fact often being complementary and
beneficial to each other. It is a form of multiple land use for maximization of production for the
diverse requirements of rural communities.
Need of Agro-forestry:
Agro-forestry is a multiple and intensive land use both for the forest areas and
agricultural lands. Planting trees on agricultural fields have the usual benefits by reduction of soil
erosion, run-off and floods and moisture conservation which in turn has benefits for crop
production.
The productivity of soils is also improved through recycling of nutrients by leaf –litter.
The nutrient status of the soil is improved or kept in a balanced state as the trees and agri-crops
have different demands of nutrients both in space and time.
Important benefits to farm community will be release of cow dung for the agricultural
land with the increased availability of fuel wood by agro-forestry techniques. The cattle will get
fodder, in all seasons, thereby increasing milk yield of milch cattle and motive power of drought
animals.
Agro-forestry will also provide additional employment opportunities and result in
increased source of income.
Agro-forestry systems are sustainable in drought prone areas where small and marginal
farmers are unable to increase their income. During drought years, when grain yield reduces to a
minimum, especially under rainfed conditions, trees in the field generate produce for sustenance
of the farmer and his cattle.
Different agro-forestry methods: Agro-forestry methods are categorized based on temporal
arrangement of crops, based on physical structure, based on components.
I. Based on temporal arrangement of crops: On the basis of crop rotation systems it is again
classified as two types. This system includes all agro-forestry systems/ types where annual food
or cash crops are alternated with tree crops over time. The two types under this are:
a. Shifting cultivation: Practice of shifting cultivation is said to be as old as agriculture itself
(Mayer, 1980), when man changed from the food gathering to food production habits. The
practice consist in clearing of forests, setting fire to the felled material after it becomes dry and
raising agricultural crops for one or more years, followed by a fallow period (8-10 years).
Meanwhile, forest trees are rejuvenating the soil and get it ready for the next cycle of burning
and cropping. Continued soil fertility depends on the return of vegetative detritus to the surface
and the assimilation of the litter breakdown products by the soil. In the past, this cultivation
system was well adapted to environment under certain socio-economic conditions of the tribal
people. However, with the increase of population and diminishing carrying capacity of forest
lands this use has lost its relevance and become a menace.
B. Taungya system: Taungya system is the modification of the shifting cultivation in which
trees are grown in conjunction with agricultural crops. It differs slightly from shifting cultivation
regarding, i) there is a temporary overlap between the crops ii) trees in crops during the follow
consists of systematically spaced and selected tree species under taungya system.
This system was first evolved in Burma in 1980 and this first modern agro-forestry
practice. The main aim of this system is afforestation of open lands with a low cost governmental
approach. Farmers are temporarily allotted government lands and contracted to plant desired tree
species while the trees are young and before the canopy closure (1-3 years) or shade becomes too
dense. The farmers are allowed to plant food crops the yield of which becomes their entirely and
is regarded as their compensation for planting trees. When food crop is no longer possible due to
shading, the farmers are transferred to another open area where they repeat the process. A large
variety of crops and trees depending on the soil and climatic conditions are grown. Meanwhile
the abandoned area is by then a well established forest and will not be cultivated for annual food
crop again until the planted area reaches the maturity and is harvested.
II. Based on Physical Structure/Inter-Cropping: Inter cropping is of four types
A. Border Tree Plantations: planting trees along the border of a crop (plot) is known as border
tree plantations. This border trees act as fence, protects the crop from wind and fire hazards.
Additionally these trees produce green manure as organic matter, fodder for farm animals and
produce fire wood.
B. Alternate strip or Alternate row planting: each strip consists of two or more rows and is
known as Alley cropping or Avenue Corridor Zonal Cropping or Hedge row cropping. When
positioned across the slopes and along the contours they are found most effective for erosion
control and slope stabilization. Most modern agroforestry system being advance through
government programmes are of these two sub systems and the multiple objectives are food,
fodder production and site stabilization.
They are more favored agroforestry system because the rows act as contour hedge rows which
help in stabilization and conserve soil on slopes and act as terracing. They are easy and less
laborious to undertake. If the trees planted are nitrogen fixing and are able to generate by
coppicing they would serve as a steady source of organic manure to rehabilitate degraded sites.
C. Random mix: this method does not follow any specific or orderly placement of the
component crops while the arrangement appears in utter confusion, the plants actually their own
special ecological nich and are able to coexist very well. For badly eroded and depleted soils
random mix may not be as effective as alley cropping.
D. Multi storied cropping: growing plants of different height in the same field at same time is
termed as multistoried cropping. It is mostly practiced in orchards and plantation crops for
maximum use of solar energy even under high planting density. It is the practice of different
crops of varying height, rooting pattern and duration to cultivate together. The objective of this
system of cropping is to utilize the vertical space more effectively and efficient utilization of soil
surface, nutrients, moisture and solar energy. In this system, the tallest components have foliage
of strong light and high evaporative demand and shorter components with foliage requiring
shade or relatively high humidity. This system is mostly practiced in Kerala.
Eg. Coconut + black pepper + cocoa + pineapple
III. Based on components:
a. Agri-silviculture: this system is the integration of forestry trees with arable crops mostly on
the arable lands to get both food and wood. Mostly nitrogen fixing trees are intercropped with
arable crops which not only provide rich organic matter and atmospheric nitrogen but also
improve the soil structure. Nitrogen fixing trees offer immense possibility of supplementing the
nitrogen requirements of crops through leaf fall loppings or green leaf manuring.
b. Alley cropping: it is a type of agri-silviculture system where food crops are grown in alley
formed by hedge rows of trees or shrubs. The space between two hedge rows of trees is called
“Alley”. Here hedge rows are cut back and kept pruned during cropping to prevent shading to
reduce the competition with food crops. This system is mostly suitable for arable lands especially
for marginal and sub marginal lands of arid regions.
Advantages: 1. It provides higher total biomass per unit area than arable crops alone.
2. It provides green fodder during lean period.
3. It utilizes the off season precipitation which otherwise would go waste.
4. Reduces soil temperature and provides favourable conditions for soil macro and micro
organisms.
c. Agri-Horticulture System: it is a system of integration of fruit trees with food crops. It is also
known as food fruit system in which short duration arable crops are grown in inter spaces of fruit
trees. Most of the fruit trees develop full canopy after several years and some of them required
regular pruning thus permitting an intercrop. Intercropping provides weed free area and yield
obtained will be a bonus to the farmers.
Eg. Growing legume vegetables in between the rows of short duration fruit crops like Ber Guava,
Pomegranate and Custard apple.
It is not advisable to grow food crops in between the fruit crops.
d. Silvipastoral System: this system is suitable for class IV and above lands. It is comprised of
growing forest trees along with the fodder crops and this system essentially integrates top-feed
tree species with ground storey forage crops to support livestock and to prevent land degradation.
This system is essentially suitable for fodder scarcity areas.
e. Horti Pastoral System: It is a two tier model for fruit-cum-fodder based agroforestry system
which integrates fruit trees with grasses/pasture species. Slow growing and lateral bearing fruit
tree species like Tamarind, Jamun, Aonla, Bael, Cashew, Wood apple are highly suitable. This
system works best in medium soils.
f. TIMFIB (Timber-cum-Fibre System): this is one of the agroforestry systems most suitable
for degraded soils. It involves integration of some timber yielding tree species with fiber yielding
plants. It was proved more remunerative than arable cropping. In Bijapur dry farming research
station, Karnataka intercropping of subabul with Agave is found to be beneficial than arable
farming.
g. Agri-Silvipastoral system: as the term suggests, this system incorporates agriculture, forest
and fruit trees. The trees, both fruit and forest, may be planted in rows with intercropping of
agricultural crops including pulses, cereals and vegetables. In areas, where high winds blow, tall
trees may be planted to serve as windbreaks and shelterbelts around the horticulture plantation.
Eg. In European countries, coniferous growing of Panicum grass under coniferous trees like
Larches, Alnus
Disadvantages of Agroforestry systems:
The following are certain disadvantages encountered in Agroforestry systems along with many
advantages.
1. Profile seedling habit of Subabul resulting in weedy growth depresses the yield of arable
crops.
2. In cultivated soils, trees occupy a larger area even up to 20 m in case of Acacia nilotica
which gives shade effect on cultivable crops.
3. In long run some trees may serve as host for pests and diseases.
4. Allelopathic effect of trees in crops Eg. Eucalyptus spp.
5. Agroforestry systems are labour intensive and reduce the scope of farm mechanization.
Benefits of Agroforestry:
1. Multiple needs: it yields extended range of products viz., food, fodder, fuel, fibre,
manure, fruits, fence etc. presence of trees gives extended range of management options
and trees can be harvested as per farmers choice and market demands.
2. Soil and water conservation: trees stabilize the soil conservation structures and make
productive use of land. Act as vegetative barrier and check run off. Reduce rain drop
impact and control soil loss. Trees utilize off season precipitation. Serves as a shelter belt
and reduce wind velocity.
3. Nutrient recycling: trees recycle the nutrients both from atmosphere and lower soil
layers. In situ green leaf manuring through leaf drop. Trees check the increase in soil
temperature especially in summer months there by protect the soil microflora and fauna.
4. Employment generation: utilization of family labour during off season. Agroforestry
helps in provision of assured income to the labourers throughout the year and also
prevents the labour migration.
5. Drought Proofing: it stabilizes the income even in risk conditions even one component
fails the other would give a harvest results in improved and stable income.
6. Bioaesthetic: besides conserving the ecosystem, it beautifies the country side which
provides recreation and increase aesthetic value.
LECTURE -21
TIMBER BASED FOREST PRODUCTS- GOOD QUALITY TIMBER
Industrial plantations have come to be recognized as an essential part of Indian forestry in
the recent part to meet the growing needs of the industry with the rising population and the living
standards of people. The important among the forest based products are classified as Timber
based forest products and Non -Timber based forest products. Timber based forest products are
pulp and paper, veneer, plywood, particle boards and fibre boards, sawmilling, plywood
including blackboards and flush doors. Apart from these, tans and dyes, gums and resins, tendu
leaves, honey, lac and silk and medicines and drugs are comes under the category of Non -
Timber based forest products.
Characteristic of good quality timber:
1. Hardness
2. Strength
3. Elasticity
4. Specific gravity
5. Toughness
6. Colour
7. Anatomical structure
8. Flexibility
9. Durability
10. Adaptability to working with tools, machines
Paper and pulpwood: Paper is the most essential commodity in the civilized world today. In
paper industry, wood represents about 30 to 50 % of the total production cost. The conventional
source of cellulose fibres for paper has been softwoods (pine, spruce, fir etc.) and hardwoods
(Shorea robusta, Madhica latifolia, Casuarina equisetifoila, Boswellia serrata). Conversion of
raw material into paper involves a number of steps. The first important step is to achieve
separation of cellulose fibres, which in turn are converted into paper mat. In chemical separation
of cellulose fibres, over 50 percent material goes into solution. This spent liquor contains
uncooked chemicals and organic matter which is mainly lignin. In an integerated mill this spent
liquor is processed to recover cooking chemicals and heat, on which is based the entire
economics of the process. The pulp is processed to run on a paper machine for conversion into
paper. The physical strength of paper and runnability depends upon the fibre characteristics. It
therefore, can be seen that the properties of raw material both physical and chemical, have basic
bearing on end product quality and overall processing. Uniformity of raw material is a very
important aspect for pulp production. For these, Eucalyptus and poplars are the most promising
raw materials for pulp and paper manufacture because of their astonishing growth. Other suitable
species are Casuarina, Bamboo
For paper and pulpwood plantations, the fitness of the species from technological point of
view is highly essential. Technological properties like consistency, handling, chemical
properties, fibre properties, processing qualities and rate of return.
Match sticks: Matchwood industry is one of the oldest wood based industries in India. The
principal raw materials required for the manufacture of safety matches are wood, red
phosphorous, sulphur, potassium chlorate and match paper. Main characteristics of a match
log are that is should be round, soft and straight grained, light in weight, free from knots and
cracks. Eg. Bombax Ceiba is the most favourable matchwood species. Other suitable species are
Ailanthus melabarica, Evodia roxburghiana
Playing Toys: For manufacturing of toys the wood should be smooth, white in nature. Eg. Salix
alba, Morus alba
Packing cases: Wooden packaging is preferred for fresh fruits, machinery, plate glass and
precision instruments etc. the primary requirements for wood packing cases are lightness
combined To store fruits, glass vessels and other packing items, wooden made packing cases are
used. For manufacturing of packing case the wood should be light in weight (400 kg/cm3),
strength, nailing and screw holding power. Eg. Spruce
Pit props: Pit prop is a length of lumber used to prop up the roofs of tunnels in coal mines. Pit
props are generally used in the round form in lengths of 1.8 to 3.6 m. The wood has to have long
durability, resistant to pressure and gravity. Eg. Tectona grandis, Shorea robusta, Acacia
nilotica, Diospyros melanoxylon
Railway coaches: Railway coach building is an important timber utilizing industry. For these,
the wood should be strong but not very heavy. Tectona grandis, Pterocarpus dalbergioides,
Dalbergia latifolia, Pterocarpus marsupium are the main timber used for railway coaches. For
accessories of different nature, Cedrus deodara, Lagestroemia lanceolata, Calophyllum elatum,
Dalbergia sissoo etc ., are suitable.
LECTURE -22
MINOR FOREST PRODUCTS- TENDU LEAVES, LAC, NATURAL COLOURS,
OILS, KATHA AND CUTCH- TANNINS- INCENSE PRODUCTS
Non -Timber based/ minor forest products have been mentioned below.
1. Tendu Leaves: Tendu (Diospyros melanoxylon) leaves are of great commercial importance in
India and are used as wrappers of tobacco to produce bidi. Coppice shoots and root suckers of
the tree produce good quality leaves and hence pollarding and pruning are practiced in certain
parts of the country. Pollarding should be done in March while plucking starts about the middle
of the April and continues up to the end of May, with onset of monsoon, collection of leaves
stops because of difficult in drying.
2 Katha and Cutch: Katha and cutch are produced from the heart wood of khair (Acacia
catechu) trees. Katha is a pale brown product rich in ‘catechin’. It is used in pan (betal leaf),
cutch is a dark brown product obtained from bark of tree rich in ‘catechu’ tannic essence has
preservative properties and is used for dyeing canvass, fishing nets mail bags and sail clothes and
also used as a boiler compound and in drilling operations. Maximums yields of Katha are
obtained from the trees felled in autumn and winter. The yields from freshly felled trees is
higher.
3 Resins: Resins may be grouped into 1) Pine-resins 2) Resins from broad leaved tree species. A
very important pine resin is obtained from tapping chirpine (Pinus roxburghii and blue pine
(pinus wallichiana) trees occurring in Himalayan forests. It is an important forestry industry.
Pine trees are regularly tapped making blazes which are freshened every week and over a period
of 8 or 9 months the resin being collected in earthen or tine pots fixed at the bottom of the
channels on the tree. The important products of resin obtained by distillation are ‘Rosin’ about
80% and ‘turpentine’ about 17%. Rosin is used in the manufacture of paper and other
derivatives. Turpentine is used in a large no. of chemical industries like ester, gum, rubber,
emulsifiers, camphor, varnish, phenyl etc.
The Resin from broad leaved species are called ‘daminers’ through true dammar comes
from a coniferous tree not found in India. They are obtained from Hopea odorat, Shorea robusta
and Indian coral tree and used for varnish, caulking boats and ships for burning as incense and in
medicine.
4 Edible fruits: Forests supply large no. of edible fruits which occur naturally and are being
increasingly cultivated in forest areas now. Among the important of these is Tamarind, Ber,
Cashew, Aonla, Wood apple, Custard apple, Jamun, Chiranji and Jack fruit etc. Mahua is also
important for its flowers.
5. Incense Products: Obtained from a tall evergreen tree of eastern Himalaya Assam, Eastern
Bengal etc. It furnishes the eagle wood or agarwood of commerce occurring in the form of dark
coloured resinous fragrant masses in the centre of bole these are used for burning as incense
while the light coloured wood in which the masses are embedded is distilled into on oil called
agar attar. Which is used as a perfume. The eagle wood is obtained from ‘Aquilaria agallocha’
(Eagle wood or Agar). Similarly Benzoin, a balsamic resin is obtained from incisions of bark of
tree Styrax benzoin (Dryander) is a tree of Malay Peninsula which is used medicinally and in the
preparation of incense wood powder.
6. Bamboos: Bamboo is called the poor man’s timber. India has rich bamboo resources. The
most valuable and universally used species i.e., Dendrocalamus strictus a comparatively small,
solid or hallow bamboo found all over India. Other common species are Bamboosa arundinecea,
B. nutens, B. tilda, Ochlandra ebracteatea O. Seriptoria, etc.
The strength of bamboo culms, their straightness, lightness combined with hardness
range in size abundance, easy propagation and short period in which they attain maturity make
them suitable for a variety of purposes including house mats, scaffoldings ladders, bridges,
fences, sticks, tools handles, toys, sports goods, furniture, musical instruments and in paper
manufacture.
7. Oil seeds: The forest oil seeds can make a sizeable contribution in meeting the vegetable oil
demands of the country. The important oilseeds of forest origin are Mahua (Madhuca latifolia),
Sal (Shorea robusta), Karanj (Pongamia pinnata), neem (Azadirechta indica) Kusum
(Schleichera olesa), Dhupa (Vateria indica) Palu (Salvodara oleoides) and Kokam (Garcinia
indica). These trees occur both in the forests and on village lands road sides. Sal is a very
important forest tree occurring gregariously. The sal seed (Kernal) has an oil content of about
12.5%. The oil extracted from the sal seed is now acceptable in the soap industry and it’s de-
oiled meal is used as a cattle or poultry feed. Sal oil is a substitute for cocoa butter in making
chocolate which is used for export for this purpose and thus assumed great importance. Oils
produced from most of the seeds referred to above are sued in various industries particularly in
soap industry.
8. Essential Oils: Among the important essential oils is the Indian sandal wood. This oil is
obtained by distillation of heartwood of sandal and evergreen parasitic tree. Besides sandal wood
oil the other essential oils of forest origin are lemon grass Palmarosa grass and Eucalyptus oils.
The oils from these grasses and E. globulus are extracted by distillation and in Eucalyptus the
leaves are suctioned. Oil is also produced from the leaves of E citriodora where the species is
pollarded annually and maintained as bush. There is a good future of Linaloo (Bursera
penicillata) tree, extracted from heart wood by distillation (Karnataka state).
9. Tans and Dyes: The important tanning materials are the myrabolans nut obtained form Harra
(Terminalia chebula) and bahara (T.bellirica). Among these the first one is most important
(Harra) which is large deciduous tree mostly found in the states of M.P. The best time of
collection of harra fruits from the point of tannin content in January fruits collected later or
earlier being considered inferior. The average tanning content of a good commercial sample is
32%.
Dyes: The well know Kamala powder obtained from the fruit glands of Mallotus spp. a small
tree found all over India is extensively collected and yields a red dye. The pulp of seeds of Bixa
orellana yields Ornatto dye of commerce with which silks are dyed yellow and red. Native series
and clothes are often dyed with the flower of palas or Dhak tree. The yellow dye obtained from
the flowers of Cedrela toona is also used for this purpose.
10. Gums: Certain valuable gums are extracted in India’s forests which ooze out from the trees
either naturally or on making artificial incision known as exudates gums. Technically the term
refers to plant ‘polysaccharides’ or their derivatives which are dispersible either in cold or hot
water to produce viscous mixtures or solutions. All gums are not soluble in water. Some of them
merely swell up in water and form a sort of gel while other are completely soluble. The
important Indian gums are Malabar Kino (Pterocarpus spp), Bengal Kino (Butea monosperma)
Ghatti (Anogeisus spp) and gum Arabic from babul tree (Acacia nilotica). True gum Arabic is
obtained from Acacia Sonegal in which Sudan has world monopoly. The most important of all
the Indian gums is however gum Karaya obtained from Sterculia urens and S.villosa both trees
of dry deciduous forests. Gum karaya is important for pharmaceutical industries both industries
consumption and for export. Generally trees of about 90 cm. girth or more in girth are tapped.
Rectangular blazes 10 x 15 cm are prescribed which are freshened upwards at fortnightly
intervals extending by 4 cm. with each freshening.
11. Lac: Lac is the resinous protective secretion of the tiny lac insect Laccifer lacca. The
ministered coloured larvae of the insect settle on young shoots of the host plants in myriads. The
secretions from the individual insects. Coalesce and form a hard continuous encrustation over the
twigs. After the completion of life cycle and just about the time the adults of the next generation
begin to emerge the resinous encrustation is scrapped from the twigs and branches of host trees
giving what is called sticklac. Shollac is obtained by either melting or extracting the resins by
solvents from seedling. Lac finds a wide variety of application in plastics electrical adhesives
leather and wood finishing printing ink and other industries. It is also the principal ingredient of
sealing wax. There are well over 100 species of plant on which the insect has been recorded but
the major hosts are Palas or Dhak and Ber (Zizyphus spp) in the case of Rangeen strain and
Kusum in the case of Kusum strain.
12. Fibers: From the leaves of sago palm or Bustard sago Caryota urens is obtained the Kittal
fibre of commerce. This palm is found growing scattered in the moist forests of Assam, Orissa,
East Bengal, etc. The fiber is of considerable value being strong and lengthy. It is used by
fishermen in preparing nets fishing lines for bristles of cloth and sari and in rope making. There
are several species of well known Agave (Sisal) plant yielding Sisal fiber is also important.
LECTURE 23
IMPORTANCE OF MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
Medicinal plants: The plants in which any one of the organs or whole plant has pharmaceutical
or Chemo Pharmaceutical utilities will be considered as Medicinal plants. These plants have the
rich sources of ingredients for drug development and synthesis. It has been estimated that around
13,000 plant species have the medicinal values. The plants have the ability to neutralize or
eliminate negative effects caused by various factors thus have the potential roles as synergistic
medicine. These also have ability to support the official medicines for the treatment of cancer.
The plants also have the ability prevent the appearance of the diseases.
Uses of Medicinal plants:
1. Used as Diuretics: Mono or poly herbal preparations have been used as Diuretics. Eg.
Mangifera indica, Mimosa pudica.etc.
2. Spermicidal activity: Root extracts of Achyranthes aspera have the Spermicidal activity
in human and Rats.
3. Anti inflammatory activity: Due to the inhibitory effect on NO production and other
scavenging activity of ROS the plants have the anti inflammatory effect.
Eg. Moringa olifera, Momordica, Curcuma longa, etc.
It is well known that most allopathic medicines produce many morbid side-effects. It is
for this reason that more and more people in the western societies are showing increasing interest
and preference for organic drugs and their preparations. Cultivation of medicinal plants offers
considerable scope for rural employment and export for foreign-ex-change earnings. India is
already a major exporter of medicinal plants. It is estimated that rupees 86 crores worth of raw
materials and drugs from medicinal plants are exported from India.
Aromatic plants: The plants which possess odorous volatile substances like essential oil, gum
exudates, balsam and Oleoresin are known as Aromatic plants. It is estimated that world
production of essential oil varies from 40,000 to 60,000 ton per year. Around 1500 Aromatic
plant species serve as raw material for perfume industry.
Uses of aromatic crops:
1. In food and flavour industry – spices and condiments
2. In perfumery, soap, cosmetics and ice-creams, aerated waters disinfectants, tobacco,
Agarbattis, etc.
3. Pharmaceutical and drug industries.
4. To manufacture pesticides, disinfectants due to antifungal, antiseptic and insecticidal
properties.
5. In pain industry – as solvents.
6. Distilled wastes are used in manufacture of card boards, cheap paper, packing material.
LECTURE -24
ASHWAGANDHA
Scientific Name: Withania somnifera
Family: Solanaceae
Common Name: Ashwagandha, Penneru gaddalu
Ashwagandha is an important medicinal crop of India. Due to the presence of several types of
alkaloids it is used as important source of drug in ancient Ayurvedic literature. Its roots contain
the alkaloid ‘Withanine A’ and ‘Withanine B’ and Somniferine have the potential use in
many ayurvedic and unani preparations.
Uses:
• Green berries are the rich source of amino acids. Fruits and seeds are diuretic in nature.
• Leaves are reported to possess anti helmenthic and febrifuge properties. An infusion of
leaves is given for fevers. For the treatment of piles, a decoction of the leaves is used
both internally and externally.
• Roots have the property of antibiotic and antitumor. Roots are mostly used for curing
general and sexual debility.
• The leaf paste is used for curing inflammations of tubercular glands and that of roots for
curing skin diseases, bronchitis and ulcers.
• Ahwagandha is used as medicine for all the age groups. Hence it is known as Indian
Ginseng.
Distribution: Ashwagandha is found wild in grazing grounds and forest lands of Madhya
Pradesh, foothills of Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Western Uttar Pradesh. Its cultivation has
been reported in Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Rajasthan and Punjab.
Description of the Plant: Ashwagandha is an erect, herbaceous, evergreen, tomentose shrub, all
parts are clothed with whitish, stellate hairs. Branching is extensive, the leaf is ovate, entire, thin,
its base is cuneate and is densely hairy beneath. The flowers are bisexual, greenish, axillary, in
clusters forming umbellate cymes. Fruits turn ornge-red in colour when they mature.
Soil: it grows successfully in sandy loam or light red soils with organic matter and drainage. A
soil pH range of 7.5 to 8.0 is ideal.
Climate: Ashwagandha prefers a subtropical climate grows luxuriantly in areas receiving
rainfall of 65-70 cm. It is planted during the late rainy season and prefers dry weather for its
successful growth.
Varieties: Jawahar Ashwagandha -20, Poshita, rashmita and Nagore.
Cultivation:
Propagation: It is propagated through seed.
The crop can be grown by direct sowing into the field as well as by raising seedlings and
transplanting them. A seed rate of 10-12 kg is required for one hectare incase of direct sowing
while 5 kg of seeds are required to provide enough seedlings for one hectare in case of the
transplanted crop. Seeds should be mixed with sand and broadcasted to maintain high plant
population. Since it is largely grown as a rainfed crop seeds are sown during July-August while
under irrigated conditions seeds are sown during October-November.
Manures and Fertilizers: At the time of last ploughing, 4-5 tonnes of farm yard manure, 20 kg
Phosphorous and 16 kg Potash fertilizers are to be applied.
Spacing (cm): 30x30.
Interculture: The directly sown crop is thinned at 25-30 days to maintain a plant population of
20,000 to 25,000 per hectare. Hand weeding at 30 days interval helps to control the weeds
effectively.
Irrigation: 2-3 irrigations are required during 3rd , 4th and 5th months under rainfed conditions.
Plant protection: Seed rotting, seedling blight and leaf blight are common diseases affecting
Aswagandha. They reduce the plant population drastically, ultimately reducing yield. their
incidence can be minimized by treating the seeds before sowing with Captan @ 3 g/kg of seeds,
followed by spraying the crop with Dithane M-45 @ 3 g/l of water when the crop is 30 days old.
The spray should be repeated at an interval of 7-10 days if the disease is not controlled.
Harvesting: Harvesting starts from January and continues till March (150-170 days after
sowing). The maturity of the crop is judged by the drying out of the leaves and the berries
turning red. The entire plant is uprooted and the roots are separated from the aerial parts by
cutting the stem 1-2 cm above the crown. The berries are plucked from the dried plants and are
threshed to obtain the seeds.
Yield: An average yield of 300 - 500 kg/ha of dried roots and 50-70 kg/ha of seeds can be
obtained under good management practices.
LECTURE 25
ALOE VERA
Scientific Name: Aloe barbadensis
Family: Liliaceae
Major products derived from the leaves of Aloe vera are Aloe and Aloe vera gel. Of
which Aloe is obtained by cutting the leaves at their base and letting the yellow, bitter juice
present in specialized cells beneath the thick epidermis is drain out. Parenchymatous tissue in the
centre of the leaf contains a mucilaginous gel which yields aloe gel or Aloe vera gel.
Uses: Fresh aloe gel is well known for its domestic medicinal value. When freshly obtained, the
gel has the property of relieving thermal burns and sunburn as well as promoting wound healing.
It also has moisturizing and emollient properties, for this reason it is used in various cosmetic
and pharmaceutical formulations. Gel is used in for the preparation of various beauty products.
Cultivation Practices:
Soil: Aloe is grown in wide range of soils with a pH range of 8.5.
Climate: Areas receiving rainfall of 35-40 cm to 150-200 cm are suitable.
Planting time: July- August for better survival
Planting material: 3-4 months old suckers with 4-5 leaves and 20-25 cm length
Propagation: Root suckers or root cuttings
Spacing: 60 x 60 cm spacing and irrigate the field immediately.
Manuring: 10-15 ton FYM per ha. Wood ash to be applied at time of planting for better
establishment and subsequent growth.
Inter cultural operations: The field should be kept weed free throughout its growth period.
Two to three hand weedings followed by hoeing per year promote good growth and suckering.
Harvesting and Yield:
Commercial yield will be obtained from 2-5 years. Generally, 3-4 pickings per year can be taken
up. On an average 15-20 t/ha leaf yield can be obtained from second year onwards,.
Uses:
1. Heals burns: Due to its soothing, moisturizing and cooling properties it will be usesful to
heal the burns
2. Improves digestive health
3. Promotes oral health
4. Clears acne
5. Relieves anal fissure
6. Cool drink in Western countries
7. As cosmetic in Pakistan and Arabian countries
8. In Ayurvedic medicine preparations
9. Use in conjunctivitis, ear pains and also useful to treat the sun stroke affected persons
LECTURE - 26
SACRED BASIL
Scientific Name: Ocimum sanctum
Family: Lamiaceae
Sacred basil is known as tulsi is a well known sacred plant of the Hindus, widely used in
religious rites since vedic times. The plant is used as a household remedy against various
ailments and is considered as a veritable drug.
Basil is an erect herbaceous much branched, strongly aromatic, soft hairy annual,
growing up to 30-75 cm in height. Stem and foliage are green or dark purple. Leaves are simple,
opposite, elliptic oblong, acute, entire or subserrate, hairy on upper and lower surfaces. Flowers
are small, purplish or crimson in terminal or auxillary racemes and close whorled.
Species and their chemical composition:
Ociumum americanum – methyl cinnamate
O. sanctum – sacred basil – methyl eugenol
O. basilicum – sweet basil – methyl chavicol
O. gratissimum – thymol, eugenol
O. kilimandscharucum – camphor basil
Crop production and management:
Soil and climate: Ocimum can be cultivated in tropical and subtropical areas. Long days and
temperature ranging from 14-30 0C are favourable for plant growth and high oil production but
susceptible to winter frost.
Wide range of soils is suitable for its cultivation including rich loam to poor laterite and
moderately acidic soils with a pH of 5.0 – 8.5 well suited for its cultivation. Water logging
conditions greatly affect the growth and causes root rot and stunted growth.
Propagation: Sacred basil is propagated through seeds. Crop can be raised either by direct
sowing or by raising seedlings in nursery and then transplanting. 200-300 g of seed is required
for one acre area. During direct sowing, seeds are mixed with dry sand and sown to ensure even
distribution. When transplanted, nursery is prepared by making raised seed beds to which farm
yard manure is incorporated. Seeds are sown in nursery during February – March. Seeds
germinate in about 8-12 days and are ready for transplanting in about 6 weeks time.
Planting: Main field is prepared after thorough ploughing and made into ridges and furrows.
When seedlings attain 4-5 leaf stage are to be transplanted during April by following a spacing of
40 cm x 40 cm.
Manures and Fertilizers: 6-8 ton of farm yard manure is applied during last plough. N:P: K at
48:120:24 kg per acre is recommended to obtain good yield. Increased application of nitrogen
progressively increases the herbage yield and oil content although higher levels of nitrogen
decreases the eugenol content. Besides major nutrients, application of micronutrients like Co and
Mn increases the oil yield.
Irrigation: After transplanting regular irrigation is given twice a week up to establishment. After
that irrigation has to be given as per the need.
Inter cultivation: After 20-25 days, when seedlings are sufficiently grown, first weeding and
thinning are done. Second weeding has to be carried out after one month of first weeding
thereafter fertilizers are to be applied as per the schedule.
Harvesting: Ocimum species are ready for first harvest in about 90-95 days after planting.
Harvest at full bloom stage is ideal for Ocimum sanctum. Harvesting is usually done on bright
sunny days to ensure drug quality and to obtain optimum oil yields. The crop should be cut 15-20
cm above ground level.
Leaves on steam distillation, yield a yellow volatile oil possessing a pleasant odour
characteristic of the plant with a clove like odour. Oil yield varies with type, season and place of
origin. Oil yield and quality do not deteriorate up to 6-8 hours after harvesting.further delay
causes considerable loss in yield and quality of oil.
Uses: The plant has a whole is an important ingredient in many Ayurvedic formulations. Whole
plant is antibacterial, antiperiodic, demulcent, expectorant, stomachic and a mosquito repellant.
Paste prepared from tulsi leaves and lime juice is applied externally for curing skin diseases.
LECTURE -27
SENNA
Common Name: Senna, Sunamukhi
Species: Cassia angustifolia
Family: Leguminaceae
Senna is a small perennial under shrub, a native of South Arabia. The leaves and pods
contain Sennosides used for their laxative properties.
Uses: Senna is used in medicine as a cathartic. It is especially useful in habitual constipation.
• It increases the peristaltic movement of the colon.
• Sennosides are used in the form of decoctions, powders, confections and many other
household preparations.
• Pods, leaves have antibacterial property.
• The powder acts as a good conditioner, combats hair loss and used for strong and
thickening the hair.
Varieties: ALFT-2 is a late flowering type released from Gujarat Agricultural University.
Sona is a high yielding variety released from Central Institute of Medicinal and
Aromatic Plants (CIMAP), Lucknow.
Soil: The crop can thrive on a variety of soils, but is largely grown on red loams, alluvial loams
and the rich clayey rice fields.
Climate: Senna is a sun loving crop and requires bright sunshine for its successful growth.
Heavy rains and cloudy weather during growth are harmful to the crop.
Cultivation:
Propagation: The crop is raised from seeds. Since the seeds have a tough seed coat a certain
amount of abrading of its surface is necessary to induce quick germination. This is achieved by
pounding the seeds lightly with coarse sand in a mortar. Soaking the seeds for 10-12 hours
before sowing also enhance the germination. About 5-6 kg seed is required for one acre. The
seeds are broadcasted at a distance of 30 cm in lines made at 30 cm apart at 1.5 to 2.5 cm depth
on well prepared land.
The seeds can also be dibbled on the inner sides of the ridges opened at 45 cm distance,
maintaining a plant to plant spacing of 30 cm. only about 5 kg of seeds are required for this
method.
Manures and Fertilizers: Farm yard manure @ 4 t/ac is to be applied at the time of last plough.
In addition to this, a fertilizer dose of 80 kg N and 40 kg each of P and K may be applied for the
optimum production of leaf, pod and total alkaloids. Of these, the entire dose of P and K and
50% of N should be applied at the time of sowing, and the remaining 50% of N is to be applied
90 days after sowing.
Crop rotation and intercropping: Senna is grown after the paddy and intercrop cultivation in
between rows of cotton, Sesamum, Chillies, Brinjal and Tomato is to be done.
Irrigation: Senna can be economically grown under rainfed conditions. 5-8 light irrigations are
enough to raise a good crop as heavy irrigations are injurious to the crop.
Interculture: When the plants begin to grow, once or twice inter culturing is given after which
the rows close up. The first weeding cum hoeing is done at 25-30 days, a second at 75-80 days
and a third at 110 days to keep the soil free from weeds.
Plant Protection: The larvae of several leaf eating caterpillars and pod borers feed on the crop.
Usually, spraying of Carbaryl 4 g/l periodically controls the infestation. The white butterfly
attack on this crop can be minimized by sowing the crop in March-April instead of June-July in
North India.
Leaf spot, Damping off and Leaf blight are the most serious diseases and causes severe damage
to the crop. Leaf spot can be controlled by spraying Ditane M-45 at 0.15% at fortnight intervals
for 3 times after the observation of the incidence. Seed treatment with Captan at 2.5 g/kg of the
seed protects the growing seedlings.
Harvesting: The first picking of the foliage crop should be done at 50-70 days age depending on
the total plant growth. The picking of the leaves is done by hand so that most of the growing tops
are removed at harvest. This also induces more branching. A second picking is taken at 90-100
days and the third picking between 130-150 days when the entire plants are removed so that the
harvested material includes both leaves and pods together.
The harvested crop should be dried for 10-12 days. The dry leaves and pods should have a light
green to greenish yellow colour. The pods are threshed during drying to remove the seeds.
Yield: A good crop of Senna can give 8 q/ac of dry leaves and 3-4 q/ ac of pods under irrigated
and good management conditions. Under rainfed conditions, the yield is about 2 q/ac of leaves
and 1 q/ac of pods.
COLEUS
Common Name: Pashan Bhendi
Species: Coleus barbatus Syn.Coleus forskohlii
Family: Lamiaceae
Coleus is one of the most significant potential medicinal crops of the trade as its
pharmaceutical properties. The tuberous roots are found to be a rich source of Forskolin which
is being developed as a drug for hypertension, glaucoma, asthma, congestive heart failures and
certain types of cancers.
Distribution: the crop has been distrtibuted all over the tropical and sub tropical regions of
India. It is cultivated in parts of Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Deccan Plateau, Bihar and
Tamil Nadu.
Description of the plant: Coleus barbatus is an aromatic perennial plant 0.5 m tall with thick
tubers and with very showy bluish to pale lavender coloured flowers, arranged in whorls on a
long spike racemes. The roots are tuberous, 20 cm long and 0.5-2.5 cm thick, they are conical,
fusiform, straight, orangish and strongly aromatic.
Varieties: A selection from Karnataka, K-8 is reported to give 0.5% Forskolin and a higher
tuber yield.
Soil: it thrives best in porous and well drained soils ranging from red and sandy loam with a pH
of 5.5 to 7.0. It can be successfully grown even marginal fertile soils however black soils are not
much suitable.
Climate: Coleus is a crop of the tropics and is found growing ell on barren hills at an altitude of
about 2400 m. it requires a temperature of 10-250C and annual rainfall of 100 to 160 centimeter
mainly between June – September. It also performs well in less humid and warmer regions of
South India.
Cultivation:
Propagation: Coleus can be propagated by seed as well as by stem cuttings. However,
propagation through seed is little difficult. Whereas, propagation by cuttings is very easy and
economical to raise the crop on large scale. For this, terminal cuttings of 10-12 cm long,
compressing of 3-4 pairs of leaves are commonly used the cuttings established well in about a
month. When the cuttings have produced sufficient roots they are transplanted to the main field.
Planting: In most area the crop is planted during June-July, August months at a spacing of 45 x
45 cm or 60 x 25 cm distance to maintain an average plant population of 20,000-25,000.
Unrooted cuttings can also be planted on flat bed or ridges.
Manures and Fertilizers: At the time lost ploughing 5-6 tonnes of farm yard manure, 20 kg
Nitrogen, 25 kg Phosphorus and 20 kg Potash per acre are added to main field. After one month
of planting additional 20kg nitrogen as to be given per acre.
Irrigation: The first irrigation is given immediately after transplanting, if there are no rains.
During the first two weeks after planting the crop is irrigated one in three days and there after
weekly irrigation is enough to obtain to good growth and yield.
Interculture: In order to obtain economic yields, frequent weeding during the early growth
period is desirable.
Plant Protection: Leaf eating caterpillars, mealy bugs and root-knot nematodes are important
pests. This can be controlled by sparing the plants and drenching their roots with 0.1% methyl
parathion. While, nematodes can be controlled by addition of neem cake 100 kg per acre during
last plough. It can also be controlled by growing marigold crop. The seeds of marigold are broad
casted during June there after it is incorporated in soil. Among the diseases, bacterial wilt is the
major one. It can be controlled by sparing and drenching the soil with 1g Carbendazim or 1g
benomil.
Harvesting: The crop is ready for harvest within 150-160 days after planting. The plants are
loosened, uprooted, the tubers separated, cleaned and shade dried for the extraction of Forskolin.
Yield: On an average, yield of 1500-2000 Kg /ha of dry tubers may be obtained.
LECTURE -28
KALMEGH
Scientific Name: Andrographis paniculata
Family: Acanthaceae
Common Name: Nelavemu
The plant is also known as ‘Rice bitters’ in West Indies and ‘King of bitters’ or ‘Chiretta’ in
England. The whole herb is the source of several diterpenoids. The bitter principle present in the
kalmegh is andrographolide is important and is distributed all over the plant body in different
proportions.
Distribution: It grows wild as an under shrub in tropical, moist, deciduous forests. The plant is
found in the plains throughout India and Sri Lanka. In India, it is distributed in the states of
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal.
Description of the plant: It is an annual herbaceous or shrubby recumbent or erect plant, 0.3 –
1.0 m height. The branches are quadrangular, often narrowly winged towards the apical region.
Leaves are lanceolate and acute. The flowers are small, solitary, in panicles with a rose coloured
corolla which is hairy externally. The fruit is linear-oblong and acute at both ends. Seeds are
numerous, yellowish-brown and glabrous.
Soil: Kalmegh is a hardy plant and can be grown on a variety of soils. Sandy loamy soil rich in
organic matter is good for its growth and yield. Soils with water logged conditions and
problematic soils are not suited for its cultivation.
Climate: This crop comes up well in tropical and subtropical regions. However cooler climates
with well distributed rainfall are ideal. It tolerates the high temperatures up to 40 – 45 0C.
Propagation: Kalmegh is propagated either by seeds or cuttings. However, for commercial
purpose the crop is raised from seeds.
Nursery raising: Seeds are either sown directly in the main field or nursery raised seedlings are
transplanted. About 160 g seed is required for one acre. While for transplanted crop, seeds are
sown in lines 5 cm apart in well prepared nursery beds of 3 x 1.5 x 0.15 m size. The seeds
germinate in about 8-10 days and the seedlings will be ready for transplanting into the main field
when they are 45-50 days old.
Sowing/Transplanting: For direct sowing, furrows are made at a distance of 30 cm and about 3-
4 seeds are sown in each spot maintain a distance of 15 cm between two plants to maintain a
plant population of 88,000. While the seedlings are transplanted at a spacing of 30 x 15 cm or
15 x 15 cm to maintain a plant population of 88,000 – 1,33,000 per acre.
LECTURE - 29
LEMON GRASS
Species and varities : Cymbopogan flexuosus
C . pendulus
Family: Graminae
Lemon grass is the source of lemon grass oil obtained from the lives and shoots of the
plant. Oil is mainly used in the manufacture of perfumes for soap, hair oils, scents and
medicines. It also has antibacterial properties. Ionouine prepared from the citran present in lemon
grass oil is one of the most important raw materials for the preparation of vitamin A. in addition
to its use in perfumineary, confectionary and liquors. It can also be used for headaches,
toothache, baths, as a diuretic agent for fever and as an insect repellents.
Distribution :
Traditionally, India has been the largest supplier of lemon grass oil to the world market but has
ceased to be so any longer. The India monopoly in the lemon grass trade in the world market has
been broken due to the entry of Guatemala and a few other Latin American states including
brazail and mexico, Puetro rico, Dominica, Haiti and china
Descripition of the plant ;
C.flexuousus var. flexuosus grow to a height of about 3 m. the leaves of the plant are linear,
lanceolte 125cm long and 1.7cm broad
Types of varieties;
There are two mainly types of lemon grass namely, the east India or true lemon
grass[C.flexuosus ness ex. Stedu wats] and the west India [south American] lemon grass
[C.citratus[D.c] stapf]. The oil obtained by the distillation of the grass of c.flexuous, called the
east india oil’ is the genuine oil of the commercial importance. It is produced in kerala and is
popularly called the Cochin oil, since it is also obtained from C. pendulus,popularly known
assnorth Indian lemon grass or jammu lemon grass, since it is grown mainly in jammu and other
Sugandhi [OD-19], Pragathi, RRL-16, CKP-25
Cultivation :
Propagation
Lemon grass is generally propagated through seed, vegetative propagation and rooted slip. Direct
seeding is widely pracitised, especially over the plains and terraced lands. For raising the crop by
direct seeding, seed rate of 20to 25kg/ ha. The seeds are uniformly broadcasted on the beds and
are covered with a thin layer of soil, followed by watering at regular intervals the seed collected
during the months of January-February are usually sown in the nursery during April-may
Planting:
Land is prepared by repeated ploughing and harrowing, and beds of 1-1.5 m width and
convenient length are made with a spacing of 30 to50 cm between beds. Three-four-leaved, 50 to
70 day-old seedlings, are planted during the monsoon season (May-June). Spacing of 30
cm x 30 cm with a plant density of 11000/ ha .
Manures and fertilizers:
Lemon garss is an exhauastive crop and it requires 275 kg N, 25 kg P O and 175 kg
2 5
k2o/ha/annum.
Soils:
It comes up on a wide variety of soils ranging from rich loam to poor laterate. Calcareous and
water-logged soils should be avoided as they are unsustainable foe its cultivation.
Climate:
It requires warm, humid climate with plenty of sunshine and a rain fall ranging from
about 200-250 cm, well distributed aver the year
Interculture:
Earthing-up of the plant after about 4 months of planting and again after every harvest is
beneficial, as root region lemon grass has a tendency to grow above the soil. The field is kept
stubble free. Generally, 2-3 weeding are necessary during the year.
Irrigation:
After planting, if there are no rains, the crop should be irrigated every alternate day
for about a month. It is recommended that 4 to 6 irrigations and give during the period February
to June under north Indian conditions, for an optimum yield.
Harvesting and yield:
The crop is perennial in nature and gives good yields for 5 years. Harvest is done by
cutting the grass 10 cm above the ground level during the first year of planting, 3 cuttings are
obtained and, subsequently, 5-6 cuttings per year are taken subject to weather conditions. The
harvesting season begins in May and continues till the end of January. The first harvest is done
about 90 days after planting both immature and over-matured grass give a lower quantity if oil.na
herbage yield of 15t/ harvest and a recovery of oil about 0.3-0.5% from fresh grass. The oil is
obtained by stem- distillation. On an average Oil yields of about 350-400 kg/ ha from the second
year onwards is considered satisfactory.
LECTURE -30
CITRONELLA
Species and varieties: Cymbopogon winterianus
C. nardus
Family: Poaceae
Citronella is an aromatic grass, gives an essential oil has great demand in the national and
international market. The oil is used extensively as a source of important perfumery chemicals
like Citronellal, Citronellol and Geraniol which finds use in soap, perfumery, cosmetic and
flavouring industries throughout the world. Citronella oil is classified in trade into two types i.e.
Ceylon citronella oil obtained from Cymbopogon nardus while the Java citronella oil obtained
from Cymbopogon winterianus is considered to be a superior type.
Distribution: It is distributed in tropical and subtropical countries like India, Taian, Guatemala,
Honduras, Malaysia and Brazil. The National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow introduced
citronella into India.
Uses: The oil of Java citronella is used in many industries. It is mainly used in soaps, mosquito
repellant creams, aromatic oils, cosmetics attar’s and flavouring industries throughout the world.
Chemical composition: Citronella oil contains Geranyl acetate, citronellyl acetate, limonene,
elemol, β- elemene, r-cardinene and traces of cubebene, calamenene, bourbonene, eugenol,
bissabolene, nerol, linalool, methyl heptenone, myrcene and α-pinene.
LECTURE -31
PALMAROSA
Species and varieties: Cymbopogon martini var. motia
C. martini var. sofia
Family: Poaceae
Cymbopogan is commonly known as Russa grass or Indian geranium or Ginger grass
is a native of most parts of subtropical India and it grows in arm humid areas since from ancient
times. It grows naturally in open scrub forests, in parts of Madhya Pradesh, Maharastra and
Andhra Pradesh. It also found to extent in some places of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Uttar
Pradesh. Now, the cultivated area has been extended to the states of Uttar Pradesh, Andhra
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. In other
countries, it is grown commercially in Indonesia, East African countries, Cuba and Brazil.
Palmarosa is an aromatic perennial grass, which attains a height of 2.5 to 3.0 m. the aerial
parts die in the winter. It tolerates drought to some extent but very susceptible to frost, its leaves
and shoots may dry up even in November when there is early frost, but usually withering starts in
December and by the end of January the plant dries up completely.
Climate: Palmarosa prefers warm tropical and subtropical conditions with an elevation of up to
300 m. A temperature of 10-380C and rainfall around 150 cm with ample sunshine are the best
suited for its cultivation. Areas which are affected by severe frost are not suitable, as the frost
kills the grass and reduces the oil content.
Soil: It grows well in well drained clay loam soils, free from water logging and with good
irrigation facilities. Soil pH of 6 to 7 is ideal. A rise in pH above 8.5 is found to decrease the
growth and consequently the oil yield.
Cultivation:
Propagation: Palmarosa is propagated by seed, root cuttings and through slips. For commercial
planting, the crop is propagated through seeds.
Nursery Raising: The nursery beds are prepared in May. Raised beds are preferable as the seeds
are not washed off by irrigation. One kg of seed is enough for per acre. As the seeds are small
and light, they are mixed with fine soil in the ratio of 1:10 for even distribution and ease in
sowing. Seeds are pre soaked in water for one night before sowing and then they are sown in
lines at 15-20 cm apart and 2-3 cm deep. In about 3 to 4 weeks, the seedlings are ready for
transplanting.
Planting: The land should be prepared well by deep ploughings and by removal of weeds and
stubbles. FYM @ 4 ton per acre is applied at the time of last ploughing. The seedlings are
transplanted into the prepared fields during the months of June-July. Seedlings of 15 cm height
are to be planted at a spacing of 45 cm between the rows and 30 cm in the rows.
Manures and Fertilizers: As the grass is perennial, it is necessary to replenish the soil. In rich
soils, manuring may not be required for the first two years. Excessive fertilization results in
increased vegetative growth and the oil content is reduced. However, for deficient and medium
fertile soils manures and fertilizers are to be added.
• Well decomposed Farm Yard Manure @ 4 ton and NPK fertilizers in the ratio of
15:20:16 kg per acre is applied.
• After one month of planting 15 kg nitrogen is applied as top dressing.
• Complex fertilizers are given in every year when the new leaves emerge.
• Ammonium sulphate @ 8 kg per acre increases the herbage as well as oil yield.
• A foliar spray of FeSo and MnSo has been found to improve the plant growth, herbage
4 4
and oil yield.
• The CIMAP, Lucknow has also recommended an application of 10 kg per ha of Zinc
which significantly increase number of tillers, herbage and oil yield without affecting the
oil content and quality.
Irrigation: After transplanting irrigation is required for every 3-4 days intervals. Thereafter
irrigation has to be given for every 8-10 days during the growing season. However, irrigation
should be stopped before harvesting.
Harvesting: The essential oil is distributed in all parts of the grass viz., the flower heads, leaves
and stems. The flower heads containing the major portion. The grass is harvested when it is 4
months old and in full bloom. Usually, the grass is cut at a height of 5-8 cm from the ground
level and the whole plant is used for distillation. The number of harvests depends upon the
climatic conditions. During the first year, one crop is obtained during October – November
whereas 2-3 crops are obtained in the subsequent years.
Distillation: Oil is obtained by steam distillation. For this, after harvesting the grass is chopped
into shorter lengths. The grass should be packed firmly as this prevents formation of steam
channels. Steam is allowed to pass into the still with a pressure from 18-32 kg in the boiler. The
mixtures of the vapours of Palmarosa oil pass into the condenser. As the distillation proceeds, the
distillate collects in the separator. The oil, being lighter than water and insoluble, floats on the
top of the separator and is continuously drawn off. The oil is then decanted and filtered. Then the
oil is stored either in aluminum containers or amber coloured bottles.
Yield: The yield of oil is low in the first year. It increases with the age of the plantation,
economical yield can be obtained up to four years. Oil yield of about 220-250 kg/ha may be
obtained from the second year onwards from irrigated crop.
GERANIUM
Speices: Pelargonium graveolens
P.radula, P. fragrance
Family: Geraniaceae
Geranium is one of the important aromatic plants, yielding an essential oil which is
highly priced for its very profound and strong rose like odour. The plant is also known as rose
geranium (or poor man’s rose). The chief constituents of the oil are geranial and Citronellol. It
is ideally used in scenting soaps and for the isolation of Rhodinal which forms part of most high
grade perfumes.
Description of the Plant: Geranium is a perennial bushy plant. The stem is cylindrical, woody
at the base, pubescent, green hen young and turning brown with age. The leaves are alternate,
simple with 5 primary lobes and highly aromatic. The inflorescence is umbellate and hairy,
flowers are bisexual.
Varieties:
Algerian or Tunisian: This type of geranium is slender with flowers of a dark pink colour. It is
being grown in the Nilgiris and is unsuitable for wet conditions. This variety yields 50-60%
more oil with a more delicate odour than that of Reunion type.
Reunion or Bourbon: Grown in the Niligiris and Anamalais, the plant is more sturdy with light
pink flowers and more suitable for wet conditions. The oil content is higher during summer
months. The terminal portion with 6 to 12 leaves contains more oil than the middle and basal
portions.
Soil: It is a shallow rooted crop, requires a well drained porous soil. Light to deep red chalkas
soils are more suitable however the black, black cotton soils are much suitable. Soil pH of 5.5 –
8.0 is ideal.
Climate: Geranium can be grown in temperate, subtropical and tropical climates at various
altitudes from 1000 to 2200 m. it thrives best in subtropical climates with a temperature ranging
from 50C to 230C. In our state, it can be grown successfully in the districts of Ranga Reddy,
Mahabubnagar and Medak.
Cultivation:
Propagation: Since there is no seed setting, it is easily propagated by cuttings. Terminal cuttings
about 20 cm long and consisting of about 8 nodes are the best suited material for propagation.
The cuttings are planted in raised beds 3 m long and 1 m wide. The soil should be well mixed
with powdered FYM. The cuttings are planted closely at a spacing of 8-10 cm. before planting,
the cut ends of the cuttings are dipped in 2000 ppm IBA solution. Before root initiation,
temporary shade is provided and the beds are watered regularly. The cuttings strike roots in 40
days, after about 60 days the cuttings are ready for transplanting.
Planting: Before planting the land should be properly prepared, ridges and furrows are made, the
application of fertilizer and irrigation should be done a day prior to planting. The cuttings are
carefully dug out from the nursery and planted at a spacing of 60 cm x 60 cm. about 15000
cuttings are required for one acre.
Manures and Fertilizers: Prior to transplanting the cuttings, 4 t of FYM, 30 kg Urea, 80 kg SSP
and 20 kg MOP are applied at the time of last ploughing. A second dose of Urea @ 30 kg is
applied 2 months after planting. The same dosage of Urea will be given after every harvest.
Irrigation: irrigation must be given immediately after planting. Thereafter irrigation has to be
given for every 3 days intervals up to one month. Additional irrigations are depends on the
weather conditions. Though geranium tolerates short periods of drought, water logging of the
crop must be completely avoided.
Interculture: Field should be kept weed free for about 2-3 months during the crop season for
this regular weeding has to be done at regular intervals.
Plant protection: It is found to be affected by wilt disease, caused by Fusarium sp. and Botrytis
sp. which are soil borne fungi. Affected plants show yellow coloured leaves, drying of branches
and finally the whole plant will die. It can be minimized by dipping the cuttings in 0.03%
Benlate solution at the time of planting. Drenching and spraying the plants with 0.1 %
Carbendazim.
Harvesting: Geranium is harvested 4 months after transplanting, when the leaves begin to turn
light-green and exhibit a change from lemon like odour of that rose. The crop should be
harvested using a sharp sickle and sent for distillation immediately. After every harvest, hoeing,
fertilizer application and irrigation are done according to the schedule. The plant then puts forth
fresh shoots, grows faster and reaches the next harvesting stage in 4 months. Thus, a total of 3
harvests can be obtained in a year. Since it is a perennial crop, a good harvest can be obtained for
3-6 years.
Distillation of Oil: The freshly harvested terminals are used for the distillation of oil. The oil is
extracted by a simple distillation method. The herbage is tightly packed in a still over the
perforated grid and tamped down tightly and the still head is clamped shut and the oil is
separated by condenser method. Care should be taken to separate water and other inert material
and the oil is stored in a clean glass or aluminum drums.
Yield: an average oil yield of 8-10 kg can be obtained from a well maintained crop.
LECTURE -32
DAVANA
Scientific Name: Artemisia pallens
Family: Asteraceae
Davana is an important aromatic erect herb, about 60 cm tall, with much divided leaves and
small yellow flowers. The stem and leaves are covered with grayish-white tomentum. The leaves
are alternate, petiolate and lobed. Inflorescence is capitulate with flowers which are peduncle to
sessile, axillary or forming lax racemes, simple, heterogamous having bisexual disc florets in the
centre and a few pistillate ray florets on the periphery.
Uses:
✓ Davana sprigs are commonly used in garlands, bouquets and religious offerings in most
parts of the country.
✓ The leaves and flowers contain the essential oil valued for its exquisite and delicate
aroma and is used in high grade perfumes and cosmetics.
✓ The essential oil of Davana which is a brown, viscous liquid with a rich, fruity odour is
being used for flavouring food, pastries, tobacco and beverages.
✓ The oil has the property of energy booster and also pain reliever of ears, joints and
digestive problems.
✓ Oil also possesses antifungal and antibacterial property.
Origin and Distribution: The plant grows wild in temperate Himalayas. It is being
commercially cultivated in south Indian states viz., Karnataka, Maharashtra, Kerala, Tamil Nadu
and Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
Climate: Growing season greatly influence the essential oil content. It can be grown in any
season while the oil content in the plants is maximum when the crop grown during the winter
season compared to the other seasons. Thus, when the crop is grown for the production of oil, it
should be planted during the first week of November to February. A few light showers with
moderate winter conditions and no frost is conducive to the good growth of the plant.
Soil: the crop is found grown on various types of soils from sandy loam to medium black.
However, a fertile, well drained, sandy loam to red loam with good drainage is ideal. It cannot
withstand for water logging conditions.
Cultivation:
Nursery Raising: Davana is propagated by seed and cuttings. For commercial cultivation seeds
are used. Usually, nursery beds of 2 m long and 1m wide are preferred. The surface of the beds
should be clod free. It is then incorporated with finely prepared FYM at the rate of 10 kg per bed.
As the seeds lose viability rapidly, only the seeds from the previous season’s crop should only be
used for sowing. About 600 g seed is enough to transplant into an area of one acre. Seeds should
be treated with captan @ 3 g per kg of seed and seeds are thoroughly mixed with sand @ 10
times of their volume. To this mixture, water is added so that the sand is sufficiently wet. It is
then tied in a cloth bag and stored in a warm place for 48 hours. the nursery bed is then flooded
with water to make a pool and the sprouting seed and sand mixture is broadcasted all over the
bed. When the seeds have settled down, a thin layer of sand is spread over just enough to cover
them. The seeds will germinate within 2-3 days of sowing. Hand watering is done till the
seedlings establish themselves. Initially there is a very slow growth of seedlings, foliar sprays of
urea (0.1%) at weekly intervals 3 weeks after sowing may be given to boost their growth.
Seedlings will be ready for transplanting in about 6-8 weeks old which attains a height of 10-12
cm.
Transplanting: Before transplanting, the field is thoroughly prepared by bringing the land to a
fine tilth with repeated ploughings. It is then laid out into plots of convenient size by laying out
bunds and channels. The plots are irrigated a prior to transplanting. The seedlings are then
transplanted at a spacing of 15 cm between rows and 7.5 cm between plants.
Manures and Fertilizers: Well decomposed FYM at the rate of 6 t per ha is incorporated into
the soil at the time of land preparation. Subsequently, a fertilizer dose of 48 kg N, 16 kg P and 16
kg K per acre is recommended. The total P and K fertilizers are given at the time of land
preparation while N is applied in three equal split doses. The first dose is given at 10 days after
transplanting and the subsequent two doses are given at 15 days intervals.
Irrigation: Immediately after transplanting, light irrigation is to be given. Later, irrigation is
provided daily till the seedlings are well established and subsequently, once in 3-4 days
depending on the weather conditions.
Interculture: The field is kept weed free by regular weeding as and when required even after
harvest. Weeding is done at 30, 60 days after transplanting. After each weeding, Urea is applied
at 20 kg per acre. Apply 10-20 kg ZnS0 if Zinc deficiency is observed. Regular application of
4
Growth Regulators (GA) and Micronutrients will increase the herb and essential oil yield.
Harvesting and yield: The crop starts flowering after 110-115 days of sowing. To obtain the
maximum essential oil yield, the plants should be harvested when about 50 % of them have come
to flowering stage. Harvesting is done by cutting the plants from the base.
The yield of fresh herbage, including flower heads (about 45%), is around 10-15 ton per hectare
which comprises the main and ratoon crop. From this essential oil of 8 -10 kg is obtained after
distillation.
The average market price for oil is around Rs. 10,000/- per kg which accounts
Rs. 80, 000 /- to 1, 00,000/- per acre per year.
