C. No. DA 151 4 (2+2)
FARM MACHINERY AND POWER
Lecture Outlines
S.No. Topic Page No.
1 Farm power - sources of different farm power, advantages and
disadvantages
2. Farm power - sources of different farm power, advantages and
disadvantages
3 Types of Engines – Parts of Oil Engine, Technical Terms Used,
Working Principle Of Petrol And Diesel Engine
4 Types of Engines – Parts of Oil Engine, Technical Terms Used,
Working Principle of Petrol And Diesel Engine
5 Fuel supply system of I.C. engine – Quality characteristics of
fuel- Ignition and power transmission system of I.C. engine
6 Lubrication System - Objectives of Lubrication - Oil Testing --
Lubrication System on Engine
7 Engine Cooling System- Need of Cooling
8 Tractors- Different Types of Tractors – Tractor Parts And
Maintenance of Tractor
9 Tractors- Different Types of Tractors – Tractor Parts And
Maintenance of Tractor
10 Tractors- Different Types of Tractors – Tractor Parts And
Maintenance of Tractor
11 Tractors- Different Types of Tractors – Tractor Parts And
Maintenance of Tractor
12 Working and Management of Power Tiller
13 Traditional and Modern Agricultural Tools
14 Disc Ploughs-Disc Angle
15 Secondary Tillage Implements- Spike Tooth Harrow, Spring Tooth
Harrow
S.No. Topic Page No.
16 Bund Former- Ridger- Cultivator Types
17 Sowing Equipments- Seed Drills- Types
18 Sprayers And Dusters
19 Weed Control – Inter Cultivation Equipment
20 Threshers- Combined Harvesters- Threshing types- Alpod
thresher- Types of Cylinders
21 Threshers- Combined Harvesters- Threshing types- Alpod
thresher- Types of Cylinders
22 Winnowing, Chaff cutter-Sugarcane crusher
23 Winnowing, Chaff cutter-Sugarcane crusher
24 Castor Decorticator-Maize Sheller
25 Groundnut Decorticator
26 Drying-Types of Drying- LSU Dryer
27 Drying-Types of Drying- LSU Dryer
28 Rice Milling
29 Grain Storage structures
30 Godowns- Types, Problems
31 Godowns- Types, Problems
32
Storage Of Fodder-Types Of Silos
LECTURE NO. 1& 2
ENERGY SOURCES - SOURCES OF DIFFERENT FARM POWER
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES.
1.0 Farm power
India is agricultural dependent country and 65 to 75 % population in India dependents on
agriculture as main employment. India has 329 m ha of land but very less per cent of land is
cultivable hence there is need to bring the uncultivable land into cultivable land. Farm Power is an
essential input in agriculture for timely field operations for increasing production and productivity
of land. Farm power is used for operating different types of machinery like tillage, planting, plant
protection, harvesting and threshing.
SOURCES OF FARM POWER There are different sources of farm power available in India
which are classified as:
1. Human power
2. Animal power
3. Mechanical power (Tractors, Power tillers, Oil engines, etc.)
4. Electrical power
5. Renewable energy (Biogas, Solar energy, Wind energy, etc.)
HUMAN POWER
Human beings are the main source of power for operating small tools and implements at
the farm. They are also employed for doing stationary work like threshing, winnowing,
chaff cutting and lifting irrigation water. Of the total rural population in India, only 30%
are involved for farm work. On an average, a man develops nearly 0.1 horse power (hp).
Advantages: Easily available and used for all types of work.
Disadvantages: Costliest power compared to all other farms of power, very low efficiency,
requires full maintenance, when not in use and affected by weather condition and seasons.
Nursery Pulling Transplanting Weedding
3
Animal power
The most important source of power on the farm all over the world and particularly in
India is animal. It is estimated that, nearly 80% of the total draft power used in agriculture
throughout the World is still provided by animals. India has 22.68 crore cattle, which is the
highest in the World. Mainly, bullocks and buffaloes happen to be the principle sources of
animal power on Indian farms. However, camels, horses, donkeys and elephants are also
used for the farm work. The average force a bullock can exert is nearly equal to one tenth
of its body weight. Power developed by an average pair of bullocks is about 1 hp for usual
farm work.
Advantages:
1. Easily available
2. Used for all types of work
3. Low initial investment
4. Supplies manure to the field and fuels to farmers
5. Live on farm produce
Disadvantages:
1. Not very efficient
2. Efficiency will be affected by seasons and weather
3. Can not perform the work continuously
4. Require full maintenance even when there is no farm work
5. Creates unhealthy and dirty atmosphere near the residence
6. Very slow at work
Ploughing with bullocks Transportion purpose
Mechanical power
Mechanical power includes movable oil engines are tractors, power tillers and self
propelled combines and non movable stationary oil engines are flour mills, cotton gins,
sugarcane crusher and sprayers. Based on type of fuel used, engines they are broadly classified
into two types
4
1. Spark ignition engines (Petrol/ Kerosene engine)
2. Compression ignition engines (Diesel engines)
The oil engine is a highly efficient device for converting fuel into useful work.
Thermal efficiency of diesel engine varies from 32 to 38 per cent while that of petrol
engine varies from 25 to 32 per cent. In modern days, almost all the tractors and power
tillers are operated by diesel engines. Diesel engines are used for operating irrigation
pumps, flour mills, oil ghanis, cotton gins, chaff cutter, sugarcane crusher, threshers,
winnowers, etc. In recent years, diesel engines, tractors and power tillers have gained
considerable popularity in agricultural operations.
Advantages:
Highly efficient
Not affected by weather
Continuously perform the work; requires less space and cheaper form of power
Different sizes are available depending on the power required
Disadvantages:
Initial capital investment is high;
Fuel is costly and
Repairs and maintenance needs technical knowledge.
The above mentioned two types of engines are called internal and external
combustion engines. They convert the thermal energy into mechanical energy.
Tractor with Leveling blade Power Tiller Maize Sheller
ELECTRICAL POWER
Recently, Electricity became very important source of power in the country. It is used for
irrigation and domestic water supply in the rural areas. Electrical power is used widely for
running electrical motors for pumping water, dairy industry, cold storage, farm product
processing, and cattle feed grinding. It is clean source of power and smooth running. Its
maintenance and operation need less attention and care. On an average, about 1/10th of the total
electrical power generated in India will be consuming for the farm work (approximately it is 4600
mega watt).
5
Advantages:
Very cheap form of power
Highly efficient (can work at a stretch)
Maintenance and operating cost is very low
Not affected by weather conditions.
Disadvantages:
Initial capital investment is high
Require good amount of technical knowledge
Causes great danger, if handled without care,
Electric motor + pump Chaff cutter Chaff cutter – motor driven
WIND ENERGY
Wind turbines works with wind energy. This is limited only to high winds. Wind speeds
must be 8 to 10 km per hour to operate the wind turbines. They are used as a tool to draw the
water from the wells, to run the flour grinding machines and to convert the wind energy into
electrical energy. The coastal highlands and mountain areas are ideal places for this energy.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
The energy mainly obtained from renewable sources of energy like sun, wind, biomass
etc. Biogas energy, wind energy and solar energy are used in agriculture and domestic
purposes with suitable devices. Renewable energy can be used for lighting, cooking, water
heating, space heating, water distillation, food processing, water pumping, and electric
generation. This type of energy is inexhaustible in nature.
Usage of renewable energy sources
• Solar energy- Solar dryers, lantern, cooker, solar still, solar refrigeration, solar lighting
etc.
• Wind energy- Water pumping, electricity generation, etc.
• Biomass energy- Gasifies to produce producer gas, pyrolysis to produce liquid fuels,
Biogas, etc.
• Tidal energy – electricity generation
• Geothermal energy- Heat and electricity production
Wind Fans Solar panel for solar energy Bio gas plant
6
LECTURE NO. 3 &4
TYPES OF ENGINES – PARTS OF OIL ENGINE, TECHNICAL TERMS USED,
WORKING PRINCIPLE OF PETROL AND DIESEL ENGINE
Fuel is chemical substance which burns in the air that chemical energy turns into
thermal energy. It can be available into liquid, solid and gaseous state. Solid fuels are coal
and cock and liquid fuels include Acetone (C H ), Butane (C H ) and Methane (CH ).
2 2 4 10 4
Engine:
Engine is a machine which is converting heat that was developed by burning fuel into
useful work (or) it is equipment which generates thermal energy and transforms it into
mechanical energy. Engine are classified into 4 types
1. Based on combustion of fuel: (i) External combustion engine (ii) Internal combustion
engine.
External combustion engine: It is the engine designed to derive its power from the fuel
which is burnt outside the engine cylinder. Combustion process utilizes heat in the form of
steam, which is generated in a boiler which is placed separately from the working cylinder.
Eg. Railway engine, steam engine
Internal combustion engine (I. C. Engine): It is the engine designed to derive its power
from the fuel, burnt within the engine cylinder. Combustion of fuel and generation of heat
takes place within the cylinder of the engine.
Eg. Oil engines, Motor car engine
2. Based on fuel used 1. Diesel engine 2. Petrol engine 3. Gas engine
Diesel engine – Diesel is used as fuel
Petrol engine – Petrol is used as fuel
Gas engines – Propane, Butane or Methane gases.
3. Based on Cylinder number
1. Single cylinder oil engine
2. Double cylinder oil engine
3. Four cylinder oil engine
4. Multiple cylinder oil engine (more than 4)
4. Based on cooling system
1. Air cooled engine
2. Water cooled engine
Principle of I.C. Engine
A mixture of fuel with correct amount of air is exploded in an engine cylinder which is
closed at one end. Due to explosion, heat is released that causes the pressure of the burning
gases to increase. The increased pressure, forces a close fitting piston to move down the
cylinder. This movement of piston is transmitted to a crank shaft by a connecting rod so
that the crankshaft turns a flywheel. This explosion has to be repeated to obtain continuous
rotation of the crankshaft. Prior to this, the burnt gases have to be expelled from the
cylinder. At the same time the fresh charge of fuel and air must be admitted and the piston
must be returns back to its starting position. The sequence of events is known as working
cycle.
Working of I.C. Engine
I.C. engine converts the reciprocating motion of piston into rotary motion of the crankshaft
by means of connecting rod. The piston which reciprocates in the cylinder is very close fit
in the cylinder. Rings are inserted in the circumferential grooves of the piston to prevent
7
leakage of gases from sides of the piston. Usually a cylinder is bored in a cylinder block. A
gasket made of copper sheet or asbestos is inserted between the cylinder and the cylinder
head. The combustion space is provided at the top of the cylinder head where combustion
takes place. There is a rod called connecting rod for connecting the piston and the
crankshaft. A pin called gudgeon pin or wristpin is provided for connecting the piston
and the connecting rod of the engine. The end of the connecting rod which fits over the
gudgeon pin is called small end of the connecting rod. The other end which fits over the
crank pin is called big end of the connecting rod. The crankshaft rotates in main bearings
which are fitted in the crankcase. A flywheel is provided at one end of the crankshaft for
smoothening the uneven torque, produced by the engine. There is an oil sump at the
bottom of the engine which contains lubricating oil for lubricating different parts of the
engine.
Fig. Working components of I.C. Engine
Engine components
Internal combustion engine consists of the following parts:
Cylinder: It is the basic part of the engine which confines the expanding gases and forms
the combustion space. It provides space in which piston operates to suck the air or air-fuel
mixture. The piston compresses the charge and the gas is allowed to expand in the
cylinder, transmitting power for useful work. Cylinders are usually made of high grade
cast-iron.
8
Fig. Components of I.C. Engine
Cylinder block: It is the solid casting which includes the cylinder and water jackets
(cooling fins in the air cooled engines).
Cylinder head: It is detachable portion of an engine which covers the cylinder and
includes the combustion chamber, spark plugs and valves.
Cylinder liner or sleeve: It is a cylindrical lining either wet or dry which is inserted in the
cylinder block in which the piston slides. Cylinder liners are fitted in the cylinder bore and
they are easily replaceable. Liners are classified as dry liner, and wet liner. Dry liner makes
metal to metal contact with the cylinder block casting. Wet liners come in contact with the
cooling water, whereas dry liners do not come in contact with cooling water.
Piston: It is a cylindrical part closed at one end which maintains a close sliding fit in the
engine cylinder. It is connected to the connecting rod by a piston pin. The force of the
expanding gases against the closed end of the piston, forces the piston down in the
cylinder. This causes the connecting rod to rotate the crankshaft. Cast iron is chosen due
to its high compressive strength, low coefficient of expansion, resistance to high
temperature, ease of casting and low cost. Aluminum and its alloys are preferred mainly
due to its lightness.
Head (crown) of piston: It is top of the piston.
Skirt: It is that portion of the piston below the piston pin which is designed to absorb the
side movements of the piston.
Piston ring: It is a split expansion ring, placed in the groove of the piston. Piston rings are
fitted in the grooves, made in the piston. They are usually made of cast iron or pressed
steel alloy. The functions of the ring are as follows:
(a) Forms a gas tight combustion chamber for all positions of piston.
(b) Reduces contact area between cylinder wall and piston wall for preventing friction
losses and excessive wear.
(c) Controls the cylinder lubrication.
(d) Transmits the heat away from the piston to the cylinder walls.
Piston rings are of two types:
(a) Compression ring
(b) Oil ring.
(a) Compression ring. Compression rings are usually plain made up of cast iron, when
two ends of the ring joints there will be small gap and it is single piece and are always
placed in the grooves of the piston nearest to the piston head. They prevent leakage of
gases from the cylinder and helps increasing compression pressure inside the cylinder.
Commonly two to three rings are used.
(b) Oil ring. Oil rings are grooved or slotted and are located either in lowest groove above
the piston pin or in a groove above the piston skirt. They control the distribution of
lubrication oil in the cylinder and the piston. They prevent excessive oil consumption. Oil
ring is provided with small holes through which excess oil returns back to the crankcase
chamber.
Piston pin: It is also called wrist pin or gudgeon pin. It is used to join the connecting rod
to the piston. It provides a flexible or hinge like connection between the piston and the
connecting rod. It is usually made of case hardened alloy steel.
Connecting rod: It is a special type of rod, one end of which is attached to the piston and
the other end to the crankshaft. It transmits the power of combustion to the crankshaft and
makes it rotate continuously. It is usually made of drop forged steel.
Crankshaft: It is the main shaft of an engine which converts the reciprocating motion of
the piston into rotary motion of the flywheel. Usually the crankshaft is made of drop forged
steel or cast steel. The space that supports the crankshaft in the cylinder block is called
main journal, whereas the part to which connecting rod is attached is known as crank
journal.
9
Fly wheel: Fly wheel is made of cast iron. Its main functions are as follows:
(a) It stores energy during power stroke and returns back the same energy during the idle
strokes, providing a uniform rotary motion by virtue of its inertia.
(b) It also carries ring gear that meshes with the pinion of the starting motor.
(c) The rear surface of the flywheel serves as one of the pressure surfaces for the clutch
plate.
(d) Engine timing marks are usually stamped on the flywheel, which helps in adjusting the
timing of the engine.
(e) Some times the flywheel serves the purpose of a pulley for transmitting power.
Crankcase: The crankcase is that part of the engine which supports and encloses the
crankshaft and camshaft. It provides a reservoir for the lubricating oil of the engine.
Cam shaft: It is a shaft which raises and lowers the inlet and exhaust valves at proper
time. Camshaft is driven by crankshaft by means of gears, chains or sprockets. The speed
of the camshaft is exactly half the speed of the crankshaft in four stroke engine. Camshaft
operates the ignition timing mechanism, lubricating oil pump and fuel pump. It is mounted
in the crankcase, parallel to the crank shaft.
Timing gear: Timing gear is a combination of gears, one gear of which is mounted at one
end of the camshaft and other gear on the end of the end of the crankshaft. Camshaft gear
is bigger in size than that of the crankshaft gear and it has twice as many teeth as that of
the losing crankshaft gear. For this reason, this gear is commonly called Half time gear.
Timing gear controls the timing of ignition, timing of opening and closing of valves as
well as fuel injection timing.
Inlet manifold: It is that part of the engine through which air or air-fuel mixture enters into
the engine cylinder. It is fitted by the side of the cylinder head.
Exhaust manifold: It is that part of the engine through which exhaust gases go out of the
engine cylinder. It is capable of with-standing high temperature of burnt gases. It is fitted
by the side of the cylinder head.
Top Dead Centre - When the piston is at the top of its stroke, it is said to be at the Top Dead
Centre (TDC),
Bottom Dead Centre - when the piston is at the bottom of its stroke, it is said to be at its Bottom
Dead Centre (BDC).
In two stroke cycle engine both the sides of the piston are effective which is not the case in four
stroke cycle engine.
Stroke - It is the linear distance travelled by the piston from Top dead centre (TDC) to Bottom
dead centre (BDC).
Clearance volume: It is the gap between the cylinder bottom and cylinder when it reaches to the
top dead center.
Classification of Internal Combustion Engine
Internal combustion engines are classified in two types depending on the period required to
complete a cycle of operation. They are four stroke and two stroke engines.
1. When the cycle is completed in two revolutions of the crankshaft, it is called four
stroke cycle engines.
2. When the cycle is completed in one revolution of the crankshaft, it is called
two stroke cycle engines.
I.C. engines are of two types:
(i) Petrol engine (carburetor type, spark ignition engine)
(ii) Diesel engine (compression ignition engine).
Petrol engine: It is the engine, in which liquid fuel is atomized, vaporized and mixed with
air in correct proportion before entering onto the engine cylinder during suction stroke.
The fuel is ignited in the cylinder by an electric spark.
10
Diesel engine: During suction stroke, only air is entered into the cylinder and compressed.
The fuel is injected through fuel injectors and ignited by heat of compression.
Working of four stroke cycle engine
In four stroke cycle engine, all the events taking place inside the engine cylinder are
completed in four strokes of the piston i.e., suction, compression, power and exhaust stroke
(Fig.3). This engine valves for controlling the inlet of charge and outlet of exhaust gases.
In two stroke cycle engine, all the events take place in two strokes of the piston.
The four strokes of the piston are as follows:
1. Suction stroke: During this stroke, only air or mixture of air and fuel are drawn inside
the cylinder. The charge enters the engine through inlet valve which remains open during
admission of charge. The exhaust valve remains closed during this stroke. The pressure in
the engine cylinder is less than atmospheric pressure during this stroke.
2. Compression strike: The charge taken in the cylinder is compressed by the piston
during this stroke. The entire charge of the cylinder is compressed to a small volume
contained in the clearance volume of the cylinder. If only air is compressed in the cylinder
(as in the case of diesel engine), the fuel is injected at the end of the compression stroke.
The ignition takes place due to high pressure and temperature. If the mixture of air and fuel
is compressed in the cylinder (as in the case of spark ignition engine i.e., petrol engine), the
mixture is ignited by spark plug. After ignition, tremendous amount of heat is generated,
causing very high pressure in the cylinder which pushes the piston backward for useful
work. Both valves are closed during this stroke.
3. Power stroke: During power stroke, the high pressure developed due to combustion of
fuel causes the piston to be forced downwards. The connecting rod with the help of
crankshaft transmits the power to the transmission system for useful work. Both valves are
closed during this stroke.
4. Exhaust stroke: Exhaust gases go out through exhaust valves during this stroke. All
the burnt gases go out of the engine and the cylinder becomes ready to receive the fresh
charge. The inlet valve is closed and exhaust valve remains open during this stroke. The
exhaust valve is closed just after the end of the exhaust stroke and the inlet valve is opened
just before the burning of the suction stroke to repeat the cycle of operation.
Thus it is found that out of four strokes, there is only one power stroke and three
idle strokes. The power stroke supplies necessary momentum for useful work.
Fig. Working of four stroke cycle engine
Two stroke cycle engine
Whole sequence of events i.e. suction, compression, power and exhaust are completed in
two strokes of the piston and in one complete revolution of the crankshaft in this type of
engines. There is no valve in this type of engine. Gas movement takes place through holes
called ports in the cylinder. The crankcase of the engine is gas tight in which the crankshaft
rotates.
11
Fig.4. Working of two stroke cycle engine
First stroke (suction + compression): When the piston moves up the cylinder, it covers
two of the ports, the exhaust port and the transfer port, which are normally almost opposite
to each other. This traps a charge of fresh mixture in the cylinder and further upward
movement of the piston compresses this charge. Further movement of the piston also
uncovers a third port in the cylinder suction port. More fresh mixture is drawn through this
port into the crankcase. Just before the end of this stroke, the mixture in the cylinder is
ignited as in the four stroke cycle.
Second stroke (Power + exhaust): The rise in pressure in the cylinder caused by the
burning gases forces the piston to move down the cylinder. When the piston goes down, it
covers and closes the suction port, trapping the mixture drawn into the crankcase during
the previous stroke then compressing it. Further downward movements of the piston
uncover first the exhaust port and then transfer port. This allows the burnt gases to flow out
through exhaust port. Also the fresh mixture under pressure in the crankcase is transferred
into the cylinder through transfer port during this stroke. Special shaped piston crown
deflect the incoming mixture up around the cylinder so that it can help in driving out the
exhaust gases.
When the piston is at the top of its stroke, it is said to be at the top dead centre (TDC).
When the piston is at the bottom of its stroke, it is said to be at its bottom dead centre
(BDC). In two stroke cycle engine, both the sides of the piston are effective, which is not
the case in case of four stroke cycle engine.
Scavenging: The process of removal of burnt or exhaust gases from the engine cylinder is
known as scavenging. Entire burnt gases do not go out in normal stroke, hence some type
of blower or compressor is used to remove the exhaust gases in two stroke cycle engine.
12
Comparison between diesel and petrol (carburetor) engines
S. Diesel engine Petrol engine
No.
1. Diesel is used as fuel. Petrol or kerosene are used.
2. Air alone is taken in during Mixture of air and fuel is taken in.
suction stroke.
3. Fuel is injected into super heated air of Air-fuel is compressed in the
the combustion space where burning combustion chamber where it is
takes place. ignited by an electric spark.
4. Air-fuel ratio is not constant Air and fuel are almost always in the
ratio of 15:1, but to vary the engine
power, quantity of mixture is varied.
5. Compression ratio of the engine varies Compression ratio of the engine varies
from 14:1 to 20:1. from 5:1 to 8:1.
6. Specific fuel consumption is about 0.2 kg Specific fuel consumption is about
per BHP per hour. 0.29 kg per BHP per hour.
7. 4.5 litres of fuel is sufficient for nearly 20 4.5 litres of fuel will last about 12 hp
hp hour. hour.
8. Diesel engine develops more torque, This characteristic is not present in
when it is heavily loaded. carburetor engines.
9. Thermal efficiency varies between Thermal efficiency varies between 25
32 and 38%. and 32%.
10. It runs at a lower Combustion gas temperature is slightly higher under partload.
temperature
11. Engine weight per horse power is high. Engine weight per horse power is
comparatively low.
12. High initial cost. Low initial cost.
13. Low operating cost. High operating cost.
13
Comparison between two stroke and four stroke engines
S. Particulars Four stroke engine Two stroke engine
No.
1. No. of power strokes one power stroke for every one power stroke for each
two revolutions revolutions
of the crankshaft of the crankshaft
2. Power for the same Small Large (about 1.5 times of 4 stroke)
cylinder volume
3. Valve mechanism Present Ports instead of valves
4. Construction and cost Complicated and expensive Simple, cheap
5. Fuel consumption Little High (about 15% more)
6. Removal of exhaust Easy Difficult
gases
7. Durability Good Poor
8. Stability of operation High Low
9. Lubrication Equipped with an Using fuel, mixed with
independent lubricating oil
lubricating oil circuit
10. Oil consumption Little Much
11. Carbon deposit inside Not so much Much because of mixed fuel
cylinder
12. Noise Suction & exhaust is Suction & exhaust is noiseless,
noiseless, but other working is but other working is noise less
noisy
13. Air tight of crankcase Un necessary Must be sealed
14. Cooling Normal Chances of overheating
15. Self weight and size Heavy & large Light & small
14
LECTURE NO.5
FUEL SUPPLY SYSTEM OF I.C. ENGINE – QUALITY CHARACTERISTICS
OF FUEL- IGNITION AND POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM OF I.C ENGINE
Fuel and fuel supply system
Fuel is a substance consumed by the engine to produce energy. The common fuels for IC
engines are: (i) petrol (ii) power kerosene, (iii) high speed diesel oil (H.S.D oil) and (iv)
light diesel oil (L.D.O)
S.No Fuel American Specific Calorific
Petroleum gravity value
Institute Degree
1. Light diesel oil (LSD) 22 0.920 10300
2. High speed diesel oil (HSD) 31 0.820 10550
3 Power kerosene 40 0.827 10850
4 Petrol 63 0.730 11100
Quality of fuel
The quality of fuel mainly depends upon the following properties: (i) Volatility of fuel, (ii)
Calorific value and (iii) Ignition quality of fuel. A good fuel contains a combination of
qualities such as good volatility, high antiknock value, chemical purity, and freedom from
gum.
Volatility of fuel
Volatility of fuel has considerable effect on the performance of the engine by affecting the
following:
(i) Ease of starting the engine.
(ii) Degree of crankcase oil dilution,
(iii) Formation of vapour lock in the fuel system
(iv) Accelerating characteristics of the engine
(v) Distribution of fuel in multi-cylinder engine.
In I. C. engine, all the liquid fuel must be converted into vapor fuel before burning. High
speed diesel oil is most difficult to vaporize. Vaporizing temperature of high speed diesel oil is
higher than that of the petrol, Hence petrol vaporizes quicker than diesel oil in the engine
cylinder. This helps in easy starting of petrol engines.
Calorific value
The heat liberated by combustion of a fuel is known as calorific value or heat value of the
fuel. It is expressed in kcal/kg of the fuel. Calorific values (kcal/kg) of different fuels are
as follows:
1) Petrol – 11,100 (highest)
2) Power kerosene –10,850
3) High speed diesel oil (HSD oil)-10,550
4) Light diesel oil (LDO oil) –10,300
Ignition quality
It refers to ease of burning the oil in the combustion chamber. Octane number and cetane
number are the measures of ignition quality of the fuel. Octane number is standard yardstick
for measuring knock characteristics of fuels.
Cetane number is the relative measure of the interval between the beginning of injection
and auto-ignition of the fuel. The higher the cetane number, the shorter the delay interval and
the greater its combustibility. Fuels with low cetane Numbers will result in difficult starting,
noise and exhaust smoke.
15
Quality of the fuel can be tested by using the following tests fuel:
1. Gravity test
2. Distillation test
3. Vapour pressure test
4. Sulphur test
5. Carbon test
6. Colour test
7. Gum test
8. Flash test
Important Properties of diesel engine
1. High speed diesel oil (HSD)
2. Light diesel oil (LDO)
High speed diesel oil is used in high speed engine vehicles and it is
Lighter weight than LDO. Light diesel oil is used in low speed engine vehicles.
Fuel supply system in compression ignition engine or diesel engine
The main components of the fuel supply system in diesel engine are:
(i) Fuel tank, (ii) Primary fuel filter, (iii) Fuel transfer pump or fuel lift pump, (iv) Secondary
fuel filter, (v) Fuel injection pump, (vi) High pressure pipes, (vii) Fuel injection nozzles or fuel
injectors and over flow pipe.
Fuel is drawn from fuel tank by fuel feed pump and forced to injection pump through fuel
filter. The injection pump supplies high pressure fuel to injection nozzles through delivery valves
and high pressure pipes. Fuel is injected into the combustion chamber through injection nozzles.
The fuel that leaks out from the injection nozzles passes out through leakage pipe and returns to
the fuel tank through the over flow pipe. Over flow valve installed at the top of the filter keeps the
feed pressure under specified limit. If the feed pressure exceeds the specified limit, the over flow
valve opens and then the excess fuel returns to fuel tank through over flow pipe.
During engine operation, the fuel is supplied by gravity from fuel tank to the
primary filter where coarse impurities are removed. From the primary filter, the fuel is
drawn by fuel transfer pump. This pump is also known as fuel lift pump, is activated by a
cam on the engine camshaft. The fuel lift pump forces fuel under low pressure (2.5kg/cm2)
through the secondary fuel.
Fuel tank: It is a storage tank for diesel. A wire gauge strainer is provided under the cap to
prevent foreign particles entering the tank.
Fuel lift pump: It transfers fuel from fuel tank to inlet gallery of fuel injection pump.
Preliminary filter (sediment bowl assembly): This filter is mostly fitted on fuel lift pump. It
prevents foreign materials from reaching inside the fuel line. It consists of a glass cap with a
gasket.
Fuel filter: Mostly two stage filters are used in diesel engines
1. Primary filter
2. Secondary filter
16
Primary filter removes course materials, water and dust while,Secondary filter removes
fine dust particles.
Fuel injection pump: It is a high pressure pump which supplies fuel to the injectors according to
the firing order of the engine. It is used to create pressure varying from 120 kg/cm2 to 300 kg/cm2.
It supplies the required quantity of fuel to each cylinder at appropriate time.
Air venting of fuel system: When air has entered the fuel lines or suction chamber of the
injection pump, venting should be done properly. Air is removed by the priming pump through
the bleeding holes of the injection pump.
Fuel injector: It is the component which delivers finely atomized fuel under high pressure to
combustion chamber of the engine. Modern tractor engines use fuel injectors which have multiple
holes.
Main parts of injectors are nozzle body, and needle valve. The needle valve is pressed
against a conical seat in the nozzle body by a spring. The injection pressure is adjusted by
adjusting a screw. In operation, fuel from injection pump enters the nozzle body through high
pressure pipe. When fuel pressure becomes so high that it exceeds the set spring pressure, the
needle valve lifts off its seat. The fuel is forced out of the nozzle spray holes into the combustion
chamber.
FUEL SUPPLY SYSTEM IN SPARK IGNITION ENGINE
The fuel supply system of spark ignition engine consists of
(i) Fuel tank
(ii) Fuel filter
(iii) Sediment bowl
(iv) Fuel lift pump
(v) Carburetor
(vi) Fuel pipes
(vii) Inlet manifold
In some spark ignition engine, the fuel tank is placed above the level of the carburetor.
The fuel flows from the fuel tank to the carburetor under the action of gravity. There are one or
two filters between the fuel tank and the carburetor. A transparent sediment bowl is also provided
to hold the dust and dirt of the fuel. If the tank is below the level of the carburetor, a lift pump is
provided in between the tank and the carburetor for forcing fuel from the tank to the carburetor of
the engine. The fuel comes from the fuel tank to the sediment bowl and then to the lift pump.
From there the fuel goes to the carburetor through suitable pipe. From the carburetor, the fuel
goes to the engine cylinder, through the inlet manifold of the engine.
Fig. Fuel supply system in diesel engine
filter to the injection pump, which is generally driven by the camshaft. The purpose of fuel
injection pump is to deliver a metered quantity of fuel at a predetermined time under
pressure (120 to 175 kg/cm2 or more) through the high pressure tubes to the injection
17
nozzles or injectors. The fuel that leaks out from the injection nozzles passes out through
leakage pipe and returns to the fuel tank through the over flow pipe. In some tractors and
industrial engines, the fuel supply is by gravity and hence no fuel lift pump is provided.
Two conditions are essential for efficient operation of the system:
(a) The fuel should be clean, free from water, suspended dirt, sand or other foreign matter.
(b) The fuel injection pump should create proper pressure, so that diesel fuel may be
perfectly atomized by injectors at proper time and quantity.
18
LECTURE NO.6
LUBRICATION SYSTEM - OBJECTIVES OF LUBRICATION - OIL TESTING -
- LUBRICATION SYSTEM ON ENGINE
I. C. engine is made of many moving parts. Due to continuous movement of two metallic
surfaces over each other, there is wearing moving parts, generation of heat and loss of power in
the engine lubrication of moving parts is essential to prevent all these harmful effects.
PURPOSE OF LUBRICATION
Lubrication produces the following effects: (a) Reducing friction effect (b) Cooling effect (c)
Sealing effect (d) Cleaning effect.
(a) Reducing frictional effect: The primary purpose of the lubrication is to reduce friction and
wear between two rubbing surfaces. Two rubbing surfaces always produce friction. The
continuous friction produce heat which causes wearing of parts and loss of power. In order to
avoid friction, the contact of two sliding surfaces must be reduced as far a possible. This can be
done by proper lubrication only. Lubrication forms an oil film between two moving surfaces.
Lubrication also reduces noise produced by the movement of two metal surfaces over each other.
(b) Cooling effect: The heat, generated by piston, cylinder, and bearings is removed by
lubrication to a great extent. Lubrication creates cooling effect on the engine parts.
(c) Sealing effect: The lubricant enters into the gap between the cylinder liner, piston and piston
rings. Thus, it prevents leakage of gases from the engine cylinder.
(d) Cleaning effect: Lubrication keeps the engine clean by removing dirt or carbon from inside of
the engine along with the oil.
Engine lubrication system The lubricating system of an engine is an arrangement of mechanisms
which maintains the supply of lubricating oil to the rubbing surfaces of an engine at correct
pressure and temperature. The parts which require lubrication are
1. Cylinder walls and piston
2. Piston pin
3. Crankshaft and connecting rod bearings
4. Camshaft bearings
5. Valve operating mechanism
6. Cooling fan
7. Water pump and
8. Ignition mechanism
ENGINE LUBRICATING SYSTEM
The lubricating system of an engine is an arrangement of mechanism and devices which maintains
supply of lubricating oil to the rubbing surface of an engine at correct pressure and temperature.
The parts which require lubrication are:
(i) cylinder walls and piston (ii) piston pin (iii) crankshaft and connecting rod bearings (iv)
camshaft bearings (v) valves and valve operating mechanism (vi) cooling fan(vii) water pump and
(viii) ignition mechanism.
There are three common systems of lubrication used on stationary engines, tractor engines and
automobiles:
(i) Splash system (ii) Forced feed system.
SPLASH SYSTEM
In this system, there is an oil trough, provided below the connecting rod. Oil is maintained at a
uniform level in the oil trough. This is obtained by maintaining a continuous flow of oil from the
oil sump or reservoir into a splash pan, which has a depression or a trough like arrangement under
each connecting rod. This pan receives its oil supply from the oil sump either by means of a gear
19
pump or by gravity. A dipper is provided at the lower end of the connecting rod. This dipper dips
into to oil trough and splashes oil out of the pan. The splashing action of oil maintains a fog or
mist of oil that drenches the inner parts of the engine such as bearings, cylinder walls, pistons,
piston pins, timing gears etc
.
Splash lubrication system
This system is usually used on single cylinder engine with closes crankcase. For effective
functioning of the engine, proper level of oil maintained in the oil pan. Lubrication depends
largely upon the size of oil holes and clearances. This system is very effective if the oil is clean
and undiluted. Its disadvantages are that lubrication is not very uniform and when the rings are
worn, the oil passes the piston into combustion chamber, causing carbon deposition, blue smoke
and spoiling the plugs. There is every possibility that oil may become very thin through crankcase
dilution. The worn metal, dust and carbon may be collected in the oil chamber and be carried to
different parts of the engine, causing wear and tear.
FORCED FEED SYSTEM
In this system, the oil is pumped directly to the crankshaft, connecting rod, piston pin, timing
gears and camshaft of the engine through suitable paths of oil. Usually the oil first enters the main
gallery, which maybe a pipe or a channel in the crankcase casting. From this pipe, it goes to each
of the main bearings through holes. From main bearings, it goes to big end bearings of connecting
rod through drilled holes in the crankshaft. From there, it goes to lubricate the walls, pistons and
rings. There is separate oil gallery to lubricate timing gears. Lubricating oil pump is a positive
displacement pump, usually gear type or vane type. The oil also goes to valve stem and rocker
arm shaft under pressure through an oil gallery.
The excess oil comes back from the cylinder head to the crankcase. The pump discharges
oil into oil pipes, oil galleries or ducts, leading different parts of the engine. This system is
commonly used on high speed multi-cylinder engine in tractors, trucks and automobiles.
20
TROUBLES IN LUBRICATION SYSTEM
There are a few common troubles in lubrication system such as: (1) Excessive oil
consumption (2) Low oil pressure and (3) Excessive oil pressure
Excessive oil consumption: When there is excessive oil consumption in the engine, the reasons
are :
(a) More oil goes to combustion chamber and gets burnt
(b) Some leakage occurs in some part of the line and
(c) Loss of oil in form of vapour through ventilating system. Oil can enter the combustion
chamber through rings and cylinder walls, worn piston rings and worn bearings.
Low oil pressure: Low oil pressure can result due to:
(i) weak relief valve spring
(ii) worn oil pump
(iii) cracked oil line
(iv) obstruction in the oil lines
(v) very thin oil and
(vi) worn out bearings.
Care should be taken to remove these defects as far as possible to increase the oil pressure in
the lubricating system. Sometimes defective oil pressure indicator shows low oil pressure. This
should be checked.
Excessive oil pressure: Excessive oil pressure may result due to :
(i) stuck relief valve
(ii) strong valve spring
(iii) clogged oil line and
(iv) very heavy oil.
These defects should be removed to reduce the excessive oil pressure in the lubricating system.
Sometimes defective oil pressure indicator records high oil pressure. Care should be taken to
check this defect.
CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF LUBRICATION SYSTEM
The following are few suggestions for good lubrication system:
• A good design of oil circulation system should be chosen.
• Correct grade of lubricant ensures long and trouble free service.
• Oil should be maintained at desired level in the oil chamber.
• Oil should be cleaned regularly and after specified period of use, old filters should be
replaced by new filters.
• Connections, pipings, valves and pressure gauge should be checked regularly.
• Oil should be changed regularly after specified interval of time. Before putting the new
oil, the crankcase should be cleaned and flushed well with flushing oil.
• Precautions should be taken to keep the oil free from dust and water.
21
LECTURE NO.7
ENGINE COOLING SYSTEM- NEED OF COOLING
Fuel is burnt inside the cylinder of an internal combustion engine to produce power.
The temperature produced on the power stroke of an engine can be as high as 1600ºC and
this is greater than melting point of engine parts.
The cylinder and cylinder head are usually made of cast iron and pistons in most cases
are made of aluminum alloy. It is estimated that about 40 % of total heat produced is
passed to the atmosphere via exhaust, 30 % is removed by cooling system and only about
30% is used to produce useful power.
Bad effects of high temperature in the engine
(i) Cylinder and piston may expand to such an extent that the piston would seize in the
cylinder and stop the engine.
(ii) Lubricating quality of the oil inside the cylinder would be destroyed due to high
temperature and there may not be sucking of air in the cylinder.
(iii) Pre-ignition of fuel mixture would take place and would cause engine knocking as
well as loss of power.
For satisfactory performance of the engine, neither overheating nor over- cooling is
desirable. Experiments have shown that best operating temperature of I.C engine lies
between 140ºF to 200 ºF, depending upon types of engines and load conditions.
Purpose of cooling
(i) To maintain optimum temperature of engine for efficient operation under all
conditions.
(ii) To dissipate surplus heat for protection of engine components like cylinder, cylinder
head, piston, piston rings and valves.
(iii) To maintain the lubricating property of the oil inside the engine cylinder for normal
functioning of the engine.
There are two different methods of cooling: (i) air cooling and (ii) water cooling.
Air cooling
Heat is conducted from the working components of the engine to the atmosphere
directly. In such engines, cylinders are generally not grouped in a block.
Principle of air cooling
The cylinder of an air cooled engine has fins to increase the area of contact of air for
speedy cooling. The cylinder is normally enclosed in a sheet metal casing called Cowling.
The flywheel has blades projecting from its face, so that it acts like a fan drawing air
through a hole in the cowling and directing it around the finned cylinder. For maintenance
of air cooling system, passage of air is kept clean by removing grasses etc. This is done by
removing the cowling and cleaning out the dirt by a stiff brush or compressed air. When
separate fan is provided, the belt tension is to be checked and adjusted if necessary.
Advantages of air cooled engine
1. It is simple in design and construction
2. Water jackets, radiators, water pump, thermostat, pipes, hoses are not required
3. It is more compact
4. Lighter in weight
Disadvantages
1. There is uneven cooling of engine parts
2. Engine temperature is generally high during working period
22
WATER COOLING SYSTEM Engines using water as cooling medium are called water cooled
engines. Water is circulated round the cylinders to absorb heat from the cylinder walls. The heated
water is conducted through a radiator to remove the heat and cool the water.
Methods of water cooling
1. Open jacket or hopper method
2. Thermo siphon method
3. Forced circulation method
1. Open jacket method There is a hopper or jacket containing water which surrounds the engine
cylinder. So long as the hopper contains water the engine continues to operate satisfactorily. As
soon as the water starts boiling it is replaced by cold water. The hopper is large enough to run for
several hours without refilling. A drain plug is provided in a low accessible position for draining
water as and when required.
2. Thermo siphon method It consists of a radiator, water jacket, fan, temperature gauge and hose
connections. The system is based on the principle that heated water which surrounds the cylinder
becomes lighter and it rises upwards in liquid column. Hot water goes to the radiator where it
passes through tubes surrounded by air. Circulation of water takes place due to the reason that
water jacket and radiator are connected at both sides i.e. at top and bottom. A fan is driven with
the help of a V belt to suck air through tubes of the radiator unit, cooling radiator water. The
disadvantage of the system is that circulation of water is greatly reduced by accumulation of scale
or foreign matter in the passage and consequently causing over heating of the engine.
3. Forced Circulation system In this method, a water pump is used to force water from radiator
to the water jacket of the engine. After circulating the entire run of water jacket, water comes back
to the radiator where it loses its heat by the process of radiation. To maintain the correct engine
temperature, a thermostat valve is placed at the outer end of cylinder head. Cooling liquid is by-
passed through the water jacket of the engine until the engine attains the desired temperature. The
thermostat valve opens and the by-pass is closed, allowing the water to go to the radiator. The
system consists of the following components
1. Water pump 2. Radiator 3. Fan 4. Fan-belt
5. Water jacket 6. Thermostat valve 7. Temperature gauge 8. Hose pipe
Water pump It is a centrifugal pump. It draws the cooled water from bottom of the radiator and
delivers it to the water jackets surrounding the engine. Thermostat valve It is a control valve
used in cooling system to control the flow of water when activated by a temperature signal. Fan
The fan is mounted on the water pump shaft. It is driven by the same belt that drives the pump and
dynamo. The purpose of radiator is to provide strong draft of air through the radiator to improve
engine cooling Water jacket - Water jackets are passages cored out around the engine cylinder as
well as around the valve opening
GOVERNOR: Governor is mechanical device, designed to control the speed of the engine with
in specified limit., used on tractor or stationary engine for
23
1. Maintaining a nearly constant speed of engine under different load conditions
2. Protecting the engine and attached equipments against high speeds, when the load is removed
or reduced
Fig. Working of forced circulation cooling system
Power transmission system
Transmission is a speed reducing mechanism, equipped with several gears. It may be
called a sequence of gears and shafts, through which the engine power is transmitted to the
tractor wheels. The system consists of various devices that cause forward and backward
movement of tractor to suit different field condition. The complete path of power from the
engine to the wheels is called power train.
Fig. Power transmission system of tractor
Function of power transmission system
(i) To transmit power from the engine to the rear wheels of the tractor.
(ii) To make reduced speed available, to rear wheels of the tractor.
(iii) To alter the ratio of wheel speed and engine speed in order to suit the field conditions.
(iv) To transmit power through right angle drive, because the crankshaft and rear axle are
normally at right angles to each other.
24
The power transmission system consists of:
(a) Clutch
(b) Transmission gears
(c) Differential
(d) Final drive
(e) Rear axle
(f) Rear wheels.
Combination of all these components is responsible for transmission of power.
Clutch
Clutch is a device, used to connect and disconnect the tractor engine from the
transmission gears and drive wheels. Clutch transmits power by means of friction between
driving members and driven members.
Necessity of clutch in a tractor
Clutch in a tractor is essential for the following reasons:
(i) Engine needs cranking by any suitable device. For easy cranking, the engine is
disconnected from the rest of the transmission unit by a suitable clutch. After starting the
engine, the clutch is engaged to transmit power from the engine to the gear box.
(ii) In order to change the gears, the gear box must be kept free from the engine power,
otherwise the gear teeth will be damaged and engagement of gear will not be perfect. This
work is done by a clutch.
(iii) When the belt pulley of the tractor works in the field it needs to be stopped without
stopping the engine. This is done by a clutch.
25
LECTURE NO. 8, 9, 10 and 11
TRACTORS- DIFFERENT TYPES OF TRACTORS –
TRACTOR PARTS AND MAI NTENANCE OF TRACTOR
Farm tractor
Tractor is a self propelled power unit having wheels or tracks for operating agricultural
implements and machines including trailers. Tractor engine is used as a prime mover for
active tools and stationary farm machinery through power take-off shaft (PTO) or belt
pulley.
Tractor development
The present tractor is the result of gradual development of machine in different stages.
History of tractor development is given below in chronological order.
1890: The word tractor appeared first on record in a patent issued on a tractor or tractor
engine invented by George H.Harris of Chicago.
1906: Successful gasoline tractor was introduced by Charles W. Hart and Charles H.
Parr of Charles city, Iowa (48A).
1920-1924: All purpose tractor was developed.
1936-1937: Diesel engine was used in tractor and pneumatic tires were introduced.
1960-61: Tractor manufacturing was started in India by first manufacturer M/s Eicher
Good Earth.
1971: Escorts tractor Ltd started producing ford tractor.
1982: Universal tractors were established.
The tractors are classified into three classes on the basis of type of construction, type of
drive and purpose.
Based on type of construction:
(a) Riding type tractors – Tractors in which a driver can sit and drive Eg. General
purpose four wheel tractors.
(b) Walking type tractors – Tractors with which the operator walks along Eg. Garden
tractors, power tillers.
Power Tillers
Based on type of drive:
(a) Track / crawler type tractors – In this type of tractors, one track is fitted instead of
wheels on either side. This track gets drive from the sprocket run by rear axle shaft. To
steer the tractor, there is not steering gear fitted. The tractor is steered by applying brakes
to one side of the track with the other track moving. These are used for bulldozing or land
clearing work.
26
(b) Wheel type of tractors – These are most commonly used agricultural tractors. They
can run fast and wheel tyres absorb a certain amount of field shocks also. These can be
further divided as :
1) Two-wheel tractors – These tractors are used for small farms, hilly area and gardening
purposes and are called power tillers.
2) Three-wheel tractors – These tractors were very popular 15 years back but now its
place has been taken by four wheel tractors. These tractors had single or dual wheel
fitted at the front end in the centre and were considered good for negotiable shorter
turns.
Three wheel tractor
3) Four-wheel tractors – These are most commonly used tractors in the country. These are
also known as all purpose tractors. On the basis of available power, these have been
classified as
(1) Small tractors – 15 to 25 hp.
(2) Medium tractors – 25 to 45 hp.
(3) Large tractors – more than 45 hp.
Four Wheel Tractor
On the basis of purpose, wheeled tractor is classified into
1. Utility Tractor 2. Row Crop Tractor 3. Orchard Tractor
4. Industrial Tractor 5. Garden Tractor 6. Rotary Tractor 7. Earth moving Tractors
27
(a) Utility tractors / All purpose tractor –It is designed in such a way that it can meet
practically all the demands for agricultural purposes such as ploughing, harrowing, leveling,
pulling, seed drill, operating threshers, and pumps through its P.T.O. These are provided with
three point linkages
(b) Row crop tractors: It is mainly designed to work in rows like planting, inter culture
etc. Such tractor is provided with replaceable driving wheels of different thread widths. It
has high ground clearance to save damage of crops. Wide wheel track can be adjusted to
suit inter row distance
(c) Orchard type tractors - These are special types of tractors used in orchards. These are
made very high in height so that driver while sitting on the seat, the operations on the trees
could be performed. No part of the tractor is protruded outside so that tractor can go easily in
between trees safely.
(D) Industrial Tractors - these are special type tractors used in the Industrial purpose like
pulling loads or fitted with crane boom for lifting loads and transporting of loads from one
place to other place. Such tractors have i) low ground clearance ii) Increased engine power
iii) good adhesion and iv) wide tyres
28
(d) Garden tractors - These tractors are in the range of 1 to 10 hp and are very small in
construction.These are mostly used for kitchen or vegetable gardens.
(e) Rotary Tillers - These are walking type of tractors and are used in small fields or on hills
where fields are very small and are at different levels where ordinary tractors cannot work
efficiently. Tined blades are fitted to the tillers to prepare the seedbeds quite effectively by
pulverizing the soil. These are also used in rice fields for paddling and other operations.
(f) Earth Moving tractors - These tractors are heavy in weight and strongly built available
both is tract and tyre type. These are used for earth moving work on dams, quarries and other
constructional works.
Selection of tractor
(i) Land holding: Under a single cropping pattern, it is normally recommended to
consider 1hp for every 2 hectares of land. In other words, one tractor of 20-25 hp is
suitable for 40 hectares farm.
(ii) Cropping pattern: Generally,1.5 hectare/hp has been recommended where adequate
irrigation facilities are available and more than one crop is taken. So a 30-35 hp tractor is
suitable for 40 hectares farm.
(iii) Soil condition: A tractor with less wheel base, higher ground clearance and low
overall weight may work successfully in lighter soil but it will not be able to give sufficient
depth in black cotton soil.
(iv) Climatic conditions: For very hot zone and desert area, air cooled engines are
preferred over water cooled engines. Similarly for higher altitude, air cooled engines are
preferred because water is liable to be frozen at higher altitude.
29
(v) Repairing facilities: It should be ensured that the tractor to be purchased has a dealer
at nearby place with all the technical skills for repair and maintenance of machine.
(vi) Running cost: Tractors with less specific fuel consumption should be preferred over
others so that running cost may belles.
(vii) Initial cost and resale value: While keeping the resale value in mind, the initial cost
should not be very high, otherwise higher amount of interest will have to be paid.
(viii) Test report: Test report of tractors released from farm machinery testing stations
should be consulted for guidance.
Components of a Tractor:
1. Engine
2. Clutch
3. Transmission
4. Wheels
5. Final drive
6. Steering system
7. Break systems
8. Battery system
9. Hydraulic lift
10. Radiator
11. P.T.O Shaft
1. I.C engine
Internal combustion of suitable horse power is used as a prime mover in a tractor. Engines
ranging from 8 to 200 hp are used in agricultural tractors. In India, four wheel tractors for
agricultural operations are fitted with 25-80 hp. Walking type tractors are fitted with 8-12 hp
engines
2. Clutch
Clutch is a device, used to connect and disconnect the tractor engine from the transmission
gears and drive wheels. Clutch transmits power by means of friction between driving members
and driven members
Necessity of clutch in a tractor
1. Engine needs cranking by any suitable device. For easy cranking, the engine is disconnected
from the rest of the transmission unit by the clutch. After starting the starting the engine, the
clutch is engaged to transmit the power from engine to gear box
2. In order to change the gears, the gear box must be kept free from engine power, otherwise the
gear teeth will be damaged and engagement of gears will be difficult. This work is done by clutch
3. When the belt pulley of the tractor works in the field it needs to be stopped with out stopping
the engine. This is done by a clutch.
3. Transmission gears
A tractor runs at high speed, but the rear wheel of the tractor requires power at low speed and high
torque. That’s why it becomes essential to reduce the engine speed and increase the torque
available at the rear wheel of the tractor because If engine power is constant, it is obvious that for
higher torque at wheels , low speed is required and vice versa.. So gear box is fitted between
engine and rear wheels for variable speed and torque.
4 wheels
The front axle of the tractor has two wheels on both sides and two side wheels on the rear
axle. These wheels propel the tractor through the power available from the engine
5. Final drive
Final drive is a gear reduction unit in the power trains between differentials and drive wheels.
Final drive transmits the power finally to the rear axle and the wheels. The tractor rear wheels are
not directly attached to the half shafts but the drive is taken through a pair of spur gears. Each half
shaft terminates in a small gear which meshes with a large gear called bull gear. The bull gear is
mounted on a shaft, carrying the tractor rear wheel. The device for final speed reduction, suitable
for tractor rear wheels is known as final drive mechanism.
6. Steering mechanism
The system, governing the angular movement of front wheels of a tractor is called
steering system. This system minimizes the efforts of the operator in turning the front wheels
with the application of leverages. The different components of steering system are i)steering
30
wheel ii) steering shaft iii) steering gear iv) drag link v) steering arm vii) tie rod viii) king pin
When the operator turns the steering wheel, the motion is transmitted through the steering shaft to
the angular motion of the pitman arm through a set of gears. The angular movement of the pitman
arm is further transmitted to the steering arm through drag link and tie rods. Steering arm are
keyed to the respective king pins which are integral part of the stub axle on which wheels are
mounted. The movement of steering arm affects the movement of front wheel.
7. Brakes
Brake is used to stop or slow down the motion of the tractor. It is mounted on the driving
axle and operated by two independent pedals. Each pedal can be operated independently to assist
the turning of tractor during field work or locked together by means of a lock. Types of brakes –
a) Mechanical brake b) hydraulic brake
8. Battery system
Since the source of electricity in a tractor is the battery, An electric motor called a self-starter
is fitted to the tractor to start the tractor engine. It is engine powered by a battery mounted on
the tractor to provide electrical power to the engine. It is also used to illuminate the tractor
front lights. Similarly, a charging dynamo can be fitted to the tractor to allow the battery to run
longer. The electric power generated by this can be returned to the battery to keep them in
working condition
9. Hydraulic control system
It is a mechanism in a tractor to raise, hold or lower the mounted implement or semi-mounted
equipments by hydraulic means. All tractors are equipped with hydraulic control system for
operating three point hitch of the tractor. Hydraulic system works on PASCAL‟s Law which
states that pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted equally in all directions.
Basic components of hydraulic system
1. Hydraulic pump
2. Hydraulic cylinder and piston
3. Hydraulic tank
4. Control valve
5. Safety valve
6. Hose pipe and fittings
7. Lifting arms
The hydraulic pump draws up oil from the oil reservoir and sends it to the control valve
under high pressure. From the control valve, the oil goes to the hydraulic cylinder to operate the
piston, which in turn, raises the arms. The implements attached with the arms are lifted up.
10. Radiator
The purpose of the radiator is to cool down the water received from the engine. The
radiator consists of three main parts: (i) upper tank, (ii) lower tank and (iii) tubes. Hot water from
the upper tank, which comes from the engine, flows downwards through the tubes. The heat
contained in the hot water is conducted to the copper fins provided around the tubes. An overflow
pipe, connected to the upper tank, permits excess water or steam to escape. There are three types
of radiators: (i) grilled tube radiator, (ii) tubular radiator and (iii) honey comb or cellular radiator
11. P.T.O Shaft
PTO shaft is a standard fitting in all the tractors as special power transmission system
provided with standard splined shaft at the rear of tractor after differential assembly system for
special types of PTO operated machines for stationary as well as tractive works such as to run
thresher, water lifting pump, centrifugal pumps, chaff cutter, electric motor, power generator,
harvester etc. the PTO shaft is always kept covered at the exposed end to avoid accidents during
operation. PTO drives consists of drive shaft, flexible couplings by the use of one or more
universal joints, tractor pulley for belt drive rotary power transmission etc., it also provided with
an additional gear unit and a tractor pulley to operate belt driven machines. The standard rpm
developed at PTO shaft is 1000 rpm and directly proportionate to engine speed.
31
IMPORTANT TERMS CONNECTED WITH TRACTORS
1. Wheel base: Wheel base is the horizontal distance between the front and rear wheels of a
tractor
2. Ground clearance: It is the height of the lowest point of the tractor from the ground surface,
the tractor being loaded to its permissible weight
3. Track: Track in the distance between the two wheels of the tractor on the same axle., measured
at the ground contact
4. Turning space: It is the diameter of the smallest circle, described by the outer most point of
the tractor, while moving at a speed not exceeding 3 km/hr with the steering wheels in full lock.
5. Cage wheels: It is a wheel or an attachment to a wheel with spaced cross bars for improving
traction of the tractor in a wet field. It is generally used in paddy field
POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM
Transmission is a speed reducing mechanism, equipped with several gears. It may be called a
sequence of gears and shafts, through which the engine power is transmitted to the tractor wheels.
The system consists of various devices that cause forward and backward movement of tractor to
suit different field condition. The complete path of power from the engine to the wheels is called
power train.
Function of power transmission system: (i) to transmit power from the engine to the rear wheels
of the tractor, (ii) to make reduced speed available, to rear wheels of the tractor, (ii) to alter the
ratio of wheel speed and engine speed in order to suit the field conditions and (iv) to transmit
32
power through right angle drive, because the crankshaft and rear axle are normally at right angles
to each other. The power transmission system consists of: (a) Clutch (b) Transmission gears (c)
Differential (d) Final drive (e) Rear axle (f) Rear wheels. Combination of all these components is
responsible for transmission of power.
Gears and Types of Gears:
A gear is a toothed wheel designed to transmit torque to another gear or toothed
component. The teeth (or cogs) of a gear are shaped to minimize wear, vibration and noise, and to
maximize the efficiency of power transmission.
Types of gear:
a) Spur gears:
These are Flat with teeth projecting radially in the plane of the wheel, "straight-cut gears". These
gears can be fitted only to parallel axles.
b) Helical gears:
A refinement over spur gears. The teeth are cut at an angle, allowing for more gradual, hence
smoother meshing between gear wheels, eliminating the whine characteristic of straight-cut gears.
- Double helical gears - Also known as herringbone gears. These gears have teeth that are 'V'
shaped. Each gear in a double helical gear can be thought of as two standard, but mirror image,
helical gears stacked. This cancels out the thrust since each half of the gear thrusts in the opposite
direction. They can be directly interchanged with spur gears without any need for different
bearings.
Periodic Operation and Maintenance service of tractor systems
Servicing after each 10 working hours
• Check crankcase oil and fill it to the normal level mark indicated on the dip stick.
• Check the fuel level in the fuel tank and fill it if required.
• Check water in the radiator and fill it if required.
• Check the oil level in air cleaner, clean and refill it to the normal level indicated on the
bowl.
• Check the battery terminal and water level in the battery, top up to the distilled water
about 3mm above the plates.
• Check the gear box oil level and refill if it necessary.
• Check the front and rear tyre pressure, normally, requires 2 kg/sq.cm in front wheel tyre
and 1 kg/sq.cm in rear wheel tyre.
• Check all nuts and bolts to keep in normal tight.
• Inspect the tractor carefully and ensure for no leakage of oil.
Servicing after each 60 hours of operation
• Check fan – belt tension and adjust it if required.
• Check water pump cooling system.
• Check the primary fuel filter, loosen the vent plug and drain tap.
• Check ad adjust the breaks for proper operation.
• Check the transmission oil level.
• Clean air cleaner.
• Check the fuel line for any leakage.
• Clean radiator pins.
Servicing after each 250 hours of operation
• Replace lubricating oil filter element.
• Repack the front wheel bearings with fresh grease.
• Oil the starter and dynamo bearings.
• Clean the sump strainer.
• Clean the strainer of fuel sediment bowl and carryout other servicing of fuel filter.
33
• Wash the fuel injection pump breather with kerosene.
• Check the hydraulic oil level in hydraulic lift housing.
Servicing after every 1000 hours of operation
• Change the transmission oil.
• Change the oil of steering gear box.
• Drain the fuel tank and clean it.
• Renew the secondary fuel filter element.
• Remove the cylinder head cover and examine the valves springs and check the tappet
clearance.
• Inspect the rocker arm assembly for proper lubrication.
• Get the cylinder lines checked for wear and tear.
• Get the piston and rings checked for wear and tear.
• Get rear axle bearing checked and repacked with recommended grade of grease through
dealer.
• Clean front axle bearings and repack them with grease.
34
LECTURE. 12
Working and Management of Power Tiller
Weeding with the use of manual tools requires high labour force. Mechanical weeders are
used to complete the weeding operation in due time at less cost. Environmental pollution caused
by chemical is also reduced by the use of mechanical weeder / tiller.
Power weeders/tillers are devices used for removing the weeds, stirring and pulverizing
the soil and for loosening the soil after the crop has begun to grow. These machines are widely
used for weeding in cotton, tomato, tapioca, paddy, sugarcane, pulses and various other plant
fields. This rotary power weeder/tillers consists of high speed motors, tiling width of these power
weeder/tillers ranges from 30-60 cm and the tiling depth ranges from 10-15 cm. The motors in
these machines are diesel operated or petrol operated and can work efficiently for a longer time.
These power weeders/tillers are self propelled with a fully functional gear box having one forward
and reverse gear transmission with clutch.
POWER TILLER
35
LECTURE NO. 13
TRADITIONAL AND MODERN AGRICULTURAL TOOLS
Tillage
It is a mechanical manipulation of soil to provide favourable condition for crop production.
Soil tillage consists of breaking the compact surface of earth to a certain depth and to
loosen the soil mass, so as to enable the roots of the crops to penetrate and spread into the
soil. Tillage may be called the practice of modifying the state of soil to provide favourable
conditions for plant growth. Tillage operation is most labour consuming and difficult
operation, compared to all subsequent operation in the field.
Objective of tillage
1. To obtain deep seed bed, suitable for different type of crops.
2. To add more humus and fertility to soil by covering the vegetation.
3. To destroy and prevent weeds.
4. To aerate the soil for proper growth of crops.
5. To increase water absorbing capacity of the soil.
6. To destroy the insects, pests and their breeding places and
7. To reduce the soil erosion.
Classification and types of tillage
Tillage is divided into two classes: 1. Primary tillage, 2. Secondary tillage
Primary tillage: It constitutes the initial major soil working operation. It is normally
designed to reduce soil strength, cover plant materials, and rearrange aggregates. The
operations performed to open up any cultivable land with a view to prepare a seed bed for
growing crops in known as Primary tillage. Implements may be tractor drawn or animal
drawn implements. Animal drawn implements mostly include indigenous plough and
mould- board plough. Tractor drawn implements include mould-board plough, disc plough,
subsoil plough, chisel plough and other similar implements.
Secondary tillage: Tillage operations following primary tillage which are performed to
crease proper soil tilth for seeding and planting are Secondary tillage. These are lighter and
finer operations, performed on the soil after primary tillage operations. Secondary tillage
consists of conditioning the soil to meet the different tillage objectives of the farm. The
implements used for secondary tillage operations are called Secondary tillage implements.
They include different types of harrow, cultivators, levelers, cited crushers and similar
implements. These operations are generally done on the surface soil of the farm. Secondary
tillage operations do not cause much soil inversion and shifting of soil from one place to
other. These operations consume less power per unit area compared to primary tillage
operations. Secondary tillage implements may be tractor drawn or bullock drawn
implements. Bullock drawn implements include harrows, cultivators, hoes etc.
PRIMARY TILLAGE IMPLEMENTS:
Indigenous plough
Indigenous plough is one of the most common implements used by Indian farmers.
There are about 40 or more different types of indigenous ploughs in this country which are
basically the same, but with variations in their shape, size and weight. These variations are
due to soil types and tillage requirements of various crops.
In addition to ploughing, the plough is used for sowing crops like wheat, barley, gram
etc., for inter culture and for harvesting the underground part of crops.
The main parts of the plough are i) body ii) shoe iii) share iv) beam and v) handle. The
body is the main part of the plough to which the shoe, beam and handle are generally
36
attached. The share is the working part of the plough, and is attached to the shoe, which
penetrates into the soil and breaks it open. The shoe also helps in stabilizing and balancing
the plough while in operation. The beam is generally a long wooden piece which connects
the main body of the plough to the yoke. A wooden piece which is attached vertically to
the body to enable the operator to control the plough is called the handle.
Ploughing by indigenous plough
When the plough is pulled forward, the shoe and share enter the soil and separate the
furrow slice from the main body of the soil. A portion of the soil rides over the shoe, but
the larger portion is pushed aside to both sides. After the plough has moved ahead leaving
the furrow behind, some of the cut soil falls back into the furrow. It has been observed that
an indigenous plough cuts a trapezoidal furrow cross section and leaves some un ploughed
land between the two adjacent furrows. To plough almost every bit of soil in the field, an
indigenous plough has to be used three times. This is the main reason for the high energy
and time requirements in using an indigenous plough as compared to other types. For
complete and through ploughing of a field, the indigenous plough must be operated three
times: first ploughing, then cross ploughing and finally ploughing along the corners.
Mould board plough
Moldboard plough is one of the oldest of all agricultural implements and is generally
considered to be the important tillage implement. Ploughing accounts for more traction energy
than any other field operation. Mould board ploughs are available for animals, power tiller and
tractor operation. While working, a mould board plough does four jobs namely a) cutting the
furrow slice b) lifting the furrow slice c) inverting the furrow slice and d) pulverizing the
furrow slice.
Components
M.B. Plough consists of (a) Share, (b) Mould Board, (c) Landside and (d) Frog (Fig.15).
Fig. Components of mould board plough
37
Share
It is the part of the plough bottom that penetrates into the soil and cut the soil in horizontal
direction below the soil surface is called share. It is a sharp, well polished and pointed
component.
Fig. Parts of share
Different portions of the share are called by different names such as (I) share point, (ii) cutting
edge, (iii) wing of the share (iv) gunnel (v) clevage edge.
The forward end of the cutting edge which actually penetrates into the soil is called share
point. The front edge of the share which makes horizontal cut in the soil is called cutting edge
if the share. The outer end of the cutting edge of the share is called wing of the share. It
supports the plough bottom.
The vertical face of the share which slides along the furrow well is called gunnel. It
takes the side thrust of the soil and supports the plough bottom against the furrow wall.
The edge of the share which forms joint between mould board and share on the frog. The
shares are made of chilled cast iron or steel. The steel mainly contains about 0.7-0.8% carbon
and about 0.5-0.8% manganese besides other minor elements.
Types of share
Share is of different such as (a) slip share (b) slip nose share (c) shin share (d) bar share
and (e) bar point share (Fig.17).
a) Slip share: it is one piece with curved cutting edge having no additional part. It is a
common type of share, mostly used by the farmers. It is simple in design, but it has got the
disadvantage that the entire share has to be replaced if it is worn out due to constantuse.
b) Slip nose share: It is a share in which the point of the share is provided by a small
detachable piece. It has the advantage that the share point can be replaced as and when
required. If the point is worn out, it can be changed without replacing the entire share,
effecting considerable economy.
c) Shin share: It is a share, having a shin as an additional part. It is similar to the slip share
with the difference that an extension is provided to fit by the side of the mould board. This
prevents the mould board from wearing along its cutting edge.
d) Bar share : It is provided with an extension on its gunnel side which acts as the landside
of the plough bottom. It does not offer any advantage over the other types.
e) Bar point share: it is a share, in which the point of the share is provided by an adjustable
and replaceable bar. This bar serves the purpose of point of the share and landside of the
plough. As the point wears out, it is pushed forward.
Fig. Types of shares
38
Mould Board
Mould board is the part of the plough, which receives the furrow slice from the share, it
lifted, turns and breaks the furrow slice. Different soil conditions require mould boards of
varying shapes and sizes to carryout a good job of ploughing. The texture of the soil,
amount of moisture and extent of vegetative cover on the surface determine the soil
pulverization. The pulverization and inversion depend upon the curvature of the mould
board. A long, gradual curved mould board turns the furrow gently and does not break the
soil much. Short, abruptly curved mould boards twist and shear the soil and pulverize it.
Mould boards for general use fall between the two extremes of the conditions. Mould
boards are made of cast iron.
The mould board is of following types
(i) General purpose (ii) stubble (iii) sod and breaker (iv) slat and (v) high speed.
(i) General purpose mould board
It is the best for all round general farm use to give through pulverization. It is a mould
board having medium curvature lying between stubble and sod. The sloping of the surface
is gradual. It turns the well-defined furrow slice and pulverizes the soil thoroughly. It has a
fairly long mould board with a gradual twist, the surface being slightly convex.
(ii) Stubble mould board
It is adopted for ploughing an old ground where good pulverization is desired. Its curvature
is not gradual, but it is abrupt along the top edge. This causes the furrow slice to be
thrown off quickly, pulverization is much better than
the other type of mould board. It is best suited in stubble soil i. e under cultivation for
years together. Stubble soil is that, soil in which stubble of the plants from the previous
crop is still left on the land at the time of ploughing. This type of mould board is not
suitable for lands with full of grasses.
(iii) Sod and breaker type mould board
It is a long mould board with gentle curvature which lifts and inverts the furrow slice. It is
used in tough soils of grasses. It turns over thickly covered soil. This is very useful where
complete inversion of soil is required by the farmer. This type has been designed for use in
sod soils.
(iv) Slat type mould board
It is a mould board whose surface is made of slats placed along the length of the mould
board, so that there are gaps between the slats. This type of mould board is often used,
where the soil is sticky, because the solid mould board does not score well in sticky soils.
(v) High speed type mould board
Most of the high speed bottoms are used on tractor ploughs for general farm use.
Fig. Types of mould board
39
Land side
Landside is the part of the plough bottom, which slides along the furrow wall,
providing stability against tilting sideways, due to soil pressure acting on the mould board.
The width of the landside of animal drawn plough varies between 5 and 10 cm. It also
helps in stabilizing the plough while in operation. Landside fastened to the frog with the
help of plough bolts. The rear bottom of the landside is known as heal which rubs against
the furrow sole.
Frog
Frog is the part of the plough bottom to which the share, mould board and land side are
attached rigidly. It is an irregular piece of metal casting and heart of the plough bottom. It
may be made of either cast iron or steel.
Plough accessories: There are few accessories are necessary for plough such as: (a)
coulter, (ii) jointer and (iii) gauge wheel.
Coulter
It is device used to cut the furrow slice vertically from the land ahead of the plough
bottom. It cut the furrow slice from the land and leaves a clear wall. It also cuts trashes
which are covered under the soil by the plough. The coulter may be a) rolling type b)
sliding type.
(a) Rolling coulter
It is round steel disc, used on ploughs to cut trash and help to keep the plough from
clogging. In general, the coulters should be set about 5cm shallower than the depth of
ploughing. To obtain a neat furrow wall, the coulter is usually set 2 cm outside the landside
of the plough. It is so fitted that it can be adjusted up and down and sideways.
(b) Sliding coulter
It is a stationery knife fixed downward in a vertical position on the ground. It includes
knife, which does not roll over the ground but slides on the ground, the knife may be
different shapes and sizes.
Jointer
It is a small irregular piece of metal having a shape similar to an ordinary plough bottom.
It looks like a miniature plough. The jointer should be set to cut 4 to 5 cm deep. The
purpose of the jointer is to cut a small furrow off the main furrow slice and throw it
towards the furrow. The jointer should be set as near the coulter as possible.
Gauge wheel
It is an auxiliary wheel of an implement, helps to maintain uniformity in respect of depth
of ploughing in different soil conditions it is usually placed in hanging position.
40
Throat clearance
Fig. Plough accessories of M.B.Plough
7.5 Adjustments of mould board plough
For proper penetration and efficient work by the mould board plough, some adjustments are made
from time to time. They are (i) Vertical suction and (ii) Horizontal suction.
A) Vertical suction (Vertical clearance) It is the maximum clearance under the land side and the
horizontal surface when the plough is resting on a horizontal surface in the working position. It is
also defined as the vertical distance from the ground, measured at the joining point of share and
land side. It helps the plough to penetrate into the soil to a proper depth. This clearance varies
according to the size of the plough.
b) Horizontal suction (Horizontal clearance) It is the maximum clearance between the land side
and the furrow wall. This suction helps the plough to cut the proper width of furrow slice. This
clearance also varies according to the size of the plough. It is also known as side clearance.
Throat clearance
It is the perpendicular distance between point of share and lower position of the beam of
the plough.
(b)
Fig. (a) Vertical suction, horizontal suction and (b) throat clearance of M.B.Plough
Plough size
The size of mould board is expressed by the width of furrow that is designed to cut. It
is the perpendicular distance from the wing of the share to the line joining the point of
share and the heel of the landside. Animal drawn ploughs are usually available in the range
between 15 and 20 cm. The size of the light plough is above 100 mm width but below 150
mm; medium plough is 150 to 200 mm and heavy plough is 200 mm and above.
Vertical clevis: it is a vertical plate with a no of holes at the end of the beam to control the
depth of operation and to adjust the line of pull.
Horizontal clevis: it is a device to make the lateral adjustment of the plough relative to the
line of pull.
41
The centre of pull or resistance: It is the point where all the forces on a plough are act.
The centre lies at a distance equal to 3/4th size of the plough from wing of the share.
LECTURE.No.14
DISC PLOUGHS-DISC ANGLE
DISC PLOUGHS
Disc ploughs
It is a plough which cuts, turns and in some cases breaks furrow slices by means of
separately mounted large steel discs. A disc plough is designed with a view to reduce
friction by making a rolling plough bottom. A disc plough works well in the conditions
where mould board plough does not work satisfactorily.
Fig. Parts of disc plough
Advantages of disc plough
(i) A disc plough can be forced to penetrate into the soil which is too hard and dry.
(ii) It works well in sticky soil in which a mould board plough does not scour. It is more
useful for deep ploughing.
(iii) It can be used safely in stony and stumpy soil without much danger of breakage.
(iv) A disc plough works well even after a considerable part of a disc is worn off in
abrasive soil.
(v) It works in loose soil also (such as peat) without much clogging.
Disadvantages of disc plough
• It is not suitable for covering surface trash and weeds affectively as mould
board plough does.
• Comparatively, the disc plough leaves the soil in rough and cloddy condition
than that of mould board plough.
• Disc plough is much heavier than mould board plough for equal capacities
because penetration of this plough is affected largely by its weight rather than
suction. There is one significant difference between mould board plough and
disc plough i.e. mould board plough forced into the ground by the suction of
the plough, while the disc plough is forced into the ground by its own weight.
Disc: It is a circular, concave revolving steel plate used for cutting and inverting the soil. It
is made of heat treated steel of 5 to 10 mm thickness. The edge of the disc is well
sharpened to cut the soil.
42
Disc angle: It is the angle at which the plane of the cutting edge of the disc is inclined to
the direction of travel. Usually, the disc angle of good plough varies between 42 and 450.
Tilt angle: It is the angle at which the plane of the cutting edge of the disc is inclined to
vertical plane. Usually, the tilt angle of good plough varies between 15 and 250.
Fig. Tilt angle and disc angle of disc plough
Scraper: It is a device to remove soil that tends to stick to the working surface of a disc.
Concavity: It is the depth measured at the center of the disc by placing its concave side on
a flat surface.
Disc ploughs are favoured in areas where the climate is dry and where the soil is rough
and stony. They also work well in heavy clay, hard pan and loose sandy soils. Such soil
conditions do not permit the operation of mould board ploughs to good advantage. It is also
preferred for land infested with heavy growth of vegetation and for land requiring deep
ploughing for reclamation purposes. It leaves the trash on top of the ground to conserve
soil moisture. Penetration of the disc plough depends mainly on the weight of the plough as
a whole. Tractor drawn disk ploughs weigh between 180 and 540 kg per disk. But the
animal drawn plough weighs about 30 kg per disk.
Disc ploughs are broadly classified as:
1. Standard disc plough - animal drawn and tractor drawn
2. Vertical disc plough or harrow ploughs
Animal drawn standard disc plough
It is attached to a universal frame which is mounted on two wheels. The frame is pulled by
a pair of bullocks and it is provided with a seat for the operator. There is only one disk
blade on these ploughs and it can be tilted back ward from 15 to 250 (tilt angle) in the
vertical plane. It also makes an angle of about 450 (disk angle) with the direction of
motion. The diameter of the disk is 45 cm. A rear furrow wheel provided with the plough
takes care of the side thrust of the plough.
8.3.1 Tractor drawn standard disc plough
It consists of one to seven disk blades which have the same tilt and disk angles as the
animal drawn plough. The diameter of the disk blades varies between 60 and 90 cm. The
perfectly round concave steel disks sharpened on the edges are bolted to the cast iron
supports which are individually suspended from the main frame. Taper roller bearings or
thrust type ball bearings are used on the ploughs. These ploughs are provided with a front
furrow wheel, a rear furrow wheel and a land wheel. There are also provided with depth
adjusting levers, drag links and scrapers on the plough. When the plough is pulled forward,
43
the individual disk rotates on its own axis. The furrow slice rides along the curvature and is
pulverized to some extent. In order to cut a deeper furrow slice, the tilt angle of the disk is
reduced. The other method of increasing the penetration is by adding weights to the plough
frame. If the soil condition is favourable, the tilt angle should be increased to achieve
better turning of the furrow slice. If the soil conditionis not favourable, the disk angle
should be increased to improve the penetration, but the width of cut should be reduced.
Fig. Standard disc plough
8.4 Vertical disk plough
It is known as harrow plough or one way disc plough. Its action is intermediate between
regular disc plough and disc harrow. It is similar to standard disk plough, major difference
is that, all the disk blades are mounted on a common axle and they rotate as one unit. The
diameter & curvature of the individual disk of the plough is slightly smaller. All the disks
are fixed to throw the furrow slice is only one direction. It may have 2 to 32 disks, spaced
about 20 to 25 cm apart on a gang. These are used for shallow ploughing and are preferred
in wheat growing areas, where moisture conservation for winter crops is the main
objective. Diameter of the disk varies between 50 and 65 cm and the disk angle ranges
from 40 to 450. Disc angle of 40 to 45° gives the minimum draft for a given width of cut.
Fig. Vertical disc plough
The following adjustments that are done on the disk ploughs to control the depth or
width of ploughing or to increase the pulverization:
(i) by increasing the tilt angle, penetration is improved.
(ii) by increasing the disk angle, penetration is improved but the width of cut is reduced.
(iii) by adding weights to the plough, penetration can be increased.
(iv) the width of the cut by the plough may be adjusted by adjusting the angle between the
frame and land wheel axle.
44
LECTURE.No.15
SECONDARY TILLAGE IMPLEMENTS- SPIKE TOOTH HARROW, SPRING
TOOTH HARROW
SECONDARY TILLAGE
Tillage operations performed after primary tillage to create proper soil tilth for seeding and
planting are called secondary tillage. These operations are lighter and finer operations performed
on the soil after primary tillage operations. Secondary tillage operations do not cause much soil
inversion and shifting of soil from one place to another place. These operations consume less
power per unit area compared to primary tillage operations. The implements used for secondary
tillage operations are called secondary tillage implements they include different types of harrows,
rollers and pulverizers, rotary tillers, tools for mulching and fallowing, cage wheels etc.
The objectives of secondary tillage
1. To improve the seed bed by greater pulverization of the soil
2. To destroy grasses and weed seeds in the field
3. To cut crop residues and mix them with top soil
4. To break the big clods and to make the field surface uniform and levelled.
Harrowing
It is secondary tillage operation which pulverizes, smoothens and packs the soil in seed
bed preparation and/or to control weeds.
Harrow
A harrow is an implement that cuts the soil to a shallow depth for smoothening and
pulverizing the soil as well as to cut the weeds and to mix materials with soil. It is an
implement used to break the clods after ploughing, to collect trash from the ploughed land
and to level the seed bed. There are many kinds of harrows namely, the disc harrow, spike
tooth harrow, spring tooth harrow, rotary cross- harrow, soil surgeon, triangular harrow,
acme harrow, blade harrow , reciprocating power harrow etc
Disc harrow
It is harrow which performs the harrowing operations by means of a set (or a number of
sets) of rotating steel discs, each set being mounted on a common shaft. Disc harrows are
of two types depending upon the sources of power:
1. Animal drawn
2. Tractor drawn
Tractor drawn disc harrow: Disc harrow is found very suitable for hard ground, full of
stalks and grasses. It cuts the lumps of soil, clods and roots. Discs are mounted on one, two
or more axles which may be set at a variable angle to the line of motion. As the harrow is
pulled ahead, the discs rotate on the ground. Depending upon the disc arrangements, disc
harrows are divided into two classes:
(i) Single action (ii) double action and
iii) Off set Disc harrow
Single action disc harrow
It is a harrow with two gangs placed end to end, which throw the soil in opposite
directions. The discs are arranged in such a way that right side gang throws the soil
towards right, and left side gang throws the soil towards left.
Double action disc harrow
A disc harrow consisting of two or more gangs, in which a set of one or two gangs
follow behind the set of the other one or two, arranged in such a way that the front and
back gangs throw the soil in opposite directions. Thus the entire field is worked twice in
each trip. It may be of two types:
45
(i) Tandem
(ii) Off-set.
Tandem disc harrow
It is a disc harrow comprising of four gangs in which each gang can be angled in
opposite direction.
Off-set disc harrow
It is a disc harrow with two gangs in tandem, capable of being off-set to either side of
the centre line of pull. Two gangs are fitted one behind the other. The soil is thrown in both
directions because discs of both gangs face in opposite directions. It is very useful for
orchards and gardens. It travels left or right of the tractor. The line of pull is not in the
middle, that‟s why it is called off-set disc harrow.
Fig. Tractor drawn disc harrows
Components of disc harrow
A disc harrow mainly consists of: (i) disc, (ii) gang, (iii) gang bolt or arbor bolt, (iv) gang
angle, (v) gang control lever, (vi) spools or spacer, (vii) bearings, (viii) transport wheels,
(ix) scraper and (x) weight box.
1. Disc: It is a circular, concave revolving steel plate used for cutting and inverting the
soil. Disc is made of high grade heat treated hardened steel. Tractor drawn disc harrows
have concave discs of size varying from 35 to 70 cm diameter. Concavity of the disc
affects penetration and pulverization of soil. Usually two types of disc are used in disc
harrows:(a) Plain disc and (b) Cut-away disc.
Plain discs have plain edges and they are used for all normal works. Most of the
harrows are fitted with plain discs only. Cut-away discs have serrated edges and they cut
stalks, grasses and other vegetative matter better than plain discs. Cut-away discs are not
very effective for pulverization of soil but it is very useful for pudding the field especially
for paddy cultivation.
2.Gang: It is an assembly of concave discs mounted on a common shaft with spools in
between.
3. Gang axle or arbor axle: It is a shaft on which a set of discs are mounted. The spacing
between the discs on the gang bolt ranges from 15cm to 23cm for light duty harrows and
25 to 30 cm for heavy duty harrows.
4. Gang angle: The angle between the axis of the gang and the line perpendicular to the
direction of travel is called Gang angle.
5. Gang control lever: A lever which operates the angling mechanism of disc harrow is
called Gang control ever.
6. Spool or Spacer: The flanged tube, mounted on the gang axle between every two discs
to retain them at fixed position laterally on the shaft is called spool or spacer. It is just a
device for keeping the discs at equal spacing on the axle. It is usually cast in special shapes
and sizes and is generally made of cast iron.
46
7. Bearing: Bearing is essential to counteract the end thrust of the gangs due to soil thrust.
Disc harrow bearings are subjected to heavy radial and thrust loads. Chilled cast iron
bearings, ball bearings or tapered roller bearings may be used on disc harrows. Oil soaked
wooden bearings are very common for disc harrows, because they are cheaply available.
Chilled cast iron bearings are also used due to their durability.
8. Transport wheel: In trailing type discs harrows, transport wheels are provided for
transport work on roads and for preventing the damage of the roads. This also helps in
protecting the edges of the discs. Mounted type disc harrows do not require wheels for
transport purpose.
9. Scraper: Scraper prevents the discs from clogging. It removes the soil that may stick to
the concave side of the disc.
10. Weight box: A box like frame is provided on the main frame of the harrow for
putting additional weight on the implement. Additional weight helps in increasing the
penetration of the discs in the soil.
Animal drawn disc harrow: It consists of:
(iii) (i) disc, (ii) gang frame, (iii) beam, (iv) gang angle mechanism, (v) scraper, (vi)
spacer(spool), (vii) clevis, (viii) axle, (ix) middle tyne, and (x) bearings.
1. Disc: Disc is the main part of the harrow which cuts and pulverizes the soil. In this 6 to
8 Discs are arranged in two gangs. The thickness of the material used for disc is at least
3.15 nm. The cutting edge is beveled for easy penetration. The disc has a square opening in
the centre to allow the passage of the axle. The disc is usually made of steel with carbon
content ranging from 0.80 to0.90%.
2. Gang frame: All the gangs are mounted on a frame, called Gang frame. It is usually
made of sturdy mild steel structure. The gang frame is bolted to the beam of the
implement.
3. Beam: It is that part of the harrow which connects the implement with the yoke. The
rear end of the beam has a clevis to fix its height of hitching to suit the size of animals. It is
made of wood which is locally available in the area.
4. Gang angle mechanism: It is a mechanism by means of which the gang angles are
adjusted. Arranged of adjusted the width and depth of cuts of the implement, is done by
gang mechanism. The lever of the gang angle is usually made of mild steel flat with a
wooden handle. The gang angle can be adjusted approximately in the range from
0º to 27 ºonly.
5. Scraper: It is that part of the harrow which scrapes the soil from the concave side of the
disc and keeps it clean for effective working of the harrow in the field.
6. Spacer (spool): Spacer is used to separate the two adjacent discs and to keep them in
position. It is usually made of cast iron. The spacer has a suitable square opening in the
middle to allow the passage of the axle.
7. Clevis: Clevis is the part fitted to the beam and the frame which permits vertical
hitching of the harrow.
8. Axle: The axle is usually 20 × 20 mm square section. The length of axis depends upon
the size of the harrow.
9. Middle tyne: The tyne which breaks the unbroken strip of soil left in between two
gangs of the harrow during operation is called middle tyne. This tyne is suitable fixed to
the rear end of the gang frame in such a way that it is replaced easily.
10. Bearing: There is one or two bearings, made of cast iron or wood fitted at each end of
the gang.
47
Fig. Animal drawn disc harrow
Drag harrows
Drag harrows have been used since ancient times; early farmers used to cut branches from
the trees for use in leveling the soil. Even today in some places farmers drag long bamboo
pieces with long nails to break the soil crust and stir the surface. These harrows are used to
break the clods, to stir the soil, to uproot the early weeds, to level the ground, to break the
soil crust and to cover the seeds. There are two principal kinds of drag harrows, namely,
(1) spike tooth and (2) spring type harrow.
Spike tooth harrow
It is a harrow with peg shaped teeth of diamond cross section to a rectangular frame.
It is used to break the clod, stir the soil, uproot the weeds, level the ground, break the soil and
cover the seeds. Its principle is to smoothen and level the soil directly after ploughing. Spike
tooth harrows may be of rigid type and flexible type. Tractor drawn harrows are usually
flexible type. It has got the advantage of being turned up for transporting purpose
This harrow mainly consists of teeth, tooth bar frame, clamps, guard, braces, levers and
hooks.
1.3 Spring tooth harrow
It is a harrow with tough flexible teeth, suitable to work in hard and stony soils.
Spring tooth harrow is fitted with springs having loops of elliptical shape. It gives a spring
action in working condition. It is used in the soil when obstructions like stone, roots and weeds
are hidden below the ground surface. This type pulverizes the soil and helps in killing weeds.
The levers are provided for setting the teeth for varying the depth of harrowing. For
light harrowing, the adjustment is done in slanting position. Draft hooks on each corner of
every section for hitching purpose.
Fig. Spike tooth harrow Fig. Spring tooth harrow
48
10.6.1 Blade harrows
The blade harrows popularly known as bakhar, is the most common type of harrow used
by Indian farmers. It is generally used in clay soils for preparing seedbeds of both kharif
(rainy season) and Rabi (winter) crops. It is also used for covering the seed in Kharif
sowing. The action of blade harrow is like that of sweep, moving into the top surface of the
soil without inverting it. Sometimes, it is used to chisel out the uncut portion left after
ploughing by an indigenous plough. Thus the primary function of the implement is to
pulverize the soil and create soil mulch. The blade is made of steel. Shisham or Babool
wood is used for making the body and the beam. The width cut by the harrow varies from
38 to 105 cm. Guntaka also is an improved type of this implement.
Frequent clogging with the roots and weeds which wrap along the edge of blade
possess a serious problem and stoppage of work. However, the improved V-shaped blade if
fitted on the implement can provide relief from clogging.. Besides, it offers the advantage
of reduction in draft, easy penetration and smooth working in the field.
Fig. Blade harrow
49
LECTURE NO. 16
BUND FORMER- RIDGER- CULTIVATOR TYPES
Bund former
It is used for making bunds or ridges by collecting the soil. Bunds are required to
hold water in the soil, thereby one can conserve moisture and prevent run-off. The size of the
bund former is determined by measuring the maximum horizontal distance between the two
rear ends of the farming boards. Bund former consists of forming board, beam and handle.
Fig. Bund former
3. Ridger
It is an implement importantly used to form ridges required for sowing row crop seeds
and plants in well-tilled soil. The ridger is also used for forming field or channels, earthing
up and similar other operations. Ridger is also known as ridging plough and double mould
board plough. The ridger generally has ’V’ shaped or wedge shaped share fitted to the frog.
The nose or tip of share penetrates into the soil and breaks the earth. The mould boards lift,
invert and also cast aside the soil, forming deep channels and ridges of the required size. A
ridger consists of beam, clevis, frog, handle, mould boards, share and sliding share.
4. Puddler
Puddler is an implement for churning the soil with water. It is used to prepare paddy
fields with standing water after initial ploughing with country plough. It breaks up the clods
and churns the soil. The main purpose of puddling is to reduce leaching of water or decrease
percolation of water, to kill the weeds by decomposition and to facilitate transplantation of
paddy seedlings by making the soil softer. Puddling is done in standing water of 5-10 cm
depth. A common puddler has puddling units each having four straight blades or paddles or
fan type blades or squirrel type blade mounted on an axle. The axle with the puddling units is
fully mounted on two bearings fitted on a frame made of metal or wood. The weight of the
puddler is 30-40 kg. A puddler consists of a frame, puddling unit, axle, metal cross beam and
handle.
5. Leveller
Land levelling is expected to bring permanent improvement in the value of land.
Levelling work is carried out to modify the existing contours of land so as to achieve certain
objectives desired for efficient agricultural production system. These objectives include
(i) efficient application of irrigation water,
(ii) improved surface drainage,
(iii) minimum soil erosion
(iv) increased conservation of rain water specially on dry lands and
(v) provision of an adequate field size and even topography for efficient mechanisation.
6. Cultivator
It is an implement for inter cultivation with laterally adjustable tines or discs to work
between crop rows. The cultivator stirs the soil, and breaks the clods. The tines fitted on the
frame of the cultivator comb the soil deeply in the field. A cultivator performs functions
intermediate between those of plough and the harrow. Destruction of weeds is the primary
function of a cultivator. The following are a few important functions performed by a
cultivator.
1. Interculture the fields.
2. Destroy the weeds in the field.
3. Aerate the soil for proper growth of crops.
4. Conserve moisture by preparing mulch on the surface.
5. To sow seeds when it is provided with sowing attachments.
6. To prevent surface evaporation and encourage rapid infiltration of rain water
into the soil.
50
Cultivator with spring loaded tines
A tine hinged to the frame and loaded with a spring so that it swings back when an
obstacle is encountered, is called spring loaded tine. Each tine of this cultivator is provided
with two heavy coil springs, tensioned to ensure minimum movement except when an obstacle
is encountered. The springs operate, when the points strike roots or large stones by allowing
the tines to ride over the obstruction, thus preventing damage. On passing over the
obstruction, the tines are automatically reset and work continues without interruption. The
tines are made of high carbon steel and are held in proper alignment on the main frame
members. This type of cultivator is particularly recommended for soils which are embedded
with stones or stumps. A pair of gauge wheel is provided on the cultivator for controlling the
depth of operation. The cultivator may be fitted with 7, 9, 11, 13 tynes or more depending
upon the requirement.
Fig. Cultivator with spring loaded tines
Cultivator with rigid tines
Rigid tines of the cultivator are those tines which do not deflect during the work in the
field. The tynes are bolted between angle braces, fastened to the main bars by sturdy clamps
and bolts. Spacing of the tynes are changed simply by slackening the bolts and sliding the
braces to the desired position. Since rigid tines are mounted on the front and rear tool bars, the
spacing between the tynes can be easily adjusted without getting the tines chocked with
stubbles of the previous crop or weed growth. A pair of gauge wheel is used for controlling
the depth of operation.
Fig. Cultivator with rigid tines
Puddlers
Puddling of soil is one of the most common farm operations in paddy growing areas.
The most desirable soil conditions at the time of transplanting appears to be one having
semi-pervious hard pan covered with approximately 10 to 15 cm dense mud and very little
free water on the surface.It usually refers to the churning of soil in the presence of excess
water by means of a puddler or any other implement for that purpose. Purpose of puddling
51
is to reduce leaching of water, to kill weeds by decomposing and to facilitate the
transplanting of paddy seedlings by making the soil softer. It is done in a standing water of
5 to 10 cm depth in the field, which has already received one ploughing by the mould
board plough. In some areas, an indigeneous plough is used as a puddler by some farmers.
Puddlers are classified as: (i) hand operated puddlers, (ii) animal drawn puddlers,
and (iii) tractor drawn puddlers. Among the various types, animal drawn puddlers are
mostly used in the country. The indigenous plough and
peg tooth harrow are used for puddling in paddy growing areas. None of these implements
are as effective as the rotating blade type puddlers.
The open blade type implement is commonly used for puddling in south India. It
consists of series of steel or cast iron blades fastened to a cast iron hub at an angle. The
number of cast iron hubs may be two or more. These hubs revolve on a steel shaft to which
the wooden beam and the operator‟s seat are attached. Sometimes, these hubs form an
integral part of the shaft which revolves either in wooden or metallic bearings at the ends
in the frame. This type of implement is generally a walking type. The effective width of the
puddler varies between 0.9 and 1.2 m.
Fig. Open blade puddler
Rotavator
It is an implement that cuts and pulverizes the soil by impact forces through a number
of rotary times or knives mounted as a horizontal shaft. It is also called “rotary tiller”. It is
suitable for shallow cultivation and weed control. It consists of a power driven shaft on
which knives or tines are mounted to cut the soil and trash. Rotor has got several types of
tines fitted on the shaft having a speed of 200-300 rpm. Generally, sharp edged L-shaped
blades are used on the rotor. According to power used, rotavators are classified as animal-
drawn, engine operated and tractor-drawn rotavators. One or two operations of this
implement are sufficient for good pulverization of soil depending upon soil and crop
conditions. It is not meant for sandy soil. The power from the engine to rotor shaft is
transmitted through chain. A clutch is provided in transmission system for engaging and
disengaging power. The speed of rotor is kept at about 350 rpm for rated rpm of 1500 of
prune mover. The depth of penetration can be adjusted up to 12.5 cm. The suitable
protective cover is provided at the rear to prevent under scattering of soil. It can cover
about 1.5-2.0 ha/day. Bullock-drawn engine operated rotary tiller is quite useful for timely
preparation of seedbed particularly in rice-wheat rotation. Power tiller operated rotary
tillers are also quite useful for hilly areas and small hand holdings.
52
LECTURE NO.17
SOWING EQUIPMENTS- SEED DRILLS- TYPES
Seeding or sowing is an art of placing seeds in the soil to have good germination in the field. A
perfect seeding gives
a. Correct amount of seed per unit area.
b. Correct depth at which seed is placed in the soil.
c. Correct spacing between row-to-row and plant-to-plant.
Sowing methods
(i) Broadcasting
Broadcasting is the process of random scattering of seed on the surface of seedbeds. It can
be done manually or mechanically both. When broadcasting is done manually, uniformity of seed
depends upon skill of the man. Soon after broadcasting the seeds are covered by planking or some
other devices. Usually higher seed rate is obtained in this system. Mechanical broadcasters are
used for large-scale work. This machine scatters the seeds on the surface of the seedbed at
controlled rates.
(ii) Dibbling
Dibbling is the process of placing and seeds in holes made in seedbed and covering them.
In this method, seeds are placed in holes make at definite depth at fixed spacing. The equipment
used for dibbling is called dibbler. It is a conical instrument used to make proper holes in the
field. Small hand dibblers are made with several conical projections made in a frame. This is very
time consuming process, so it is not suitable for small seeds. Mostly vegetables are sown in this
way.
(iii) Drilling
Drilling consists of dropping the seeds in furrow lines in a continuous flow and covering
them with soil. Seed metering may be done either manually or mechanically. The number of rows
planted may be one or more. This method is very helpful in achieving proper depth, proper
spacing and proper amount of seed to be sown in the field. Drilling can be done by (1) Sowing
behind the plough (2) Bullock drawn seed drills (3) Tractor drawn seed drills.
(iv) Seed dropping behind the plough
It is very common method used in villages. It is used for seed like maize, gram, peas,
wheat and barley. A man drops seeds in the furrow behind the plough. Sowing behind the plough
can be done by a device known as malobansa. It consists of a bamboo tube provided with a funnel
shaped mouth. One man drops the seeds through the funnel and other man handles the plough and
the bullocks. This is a slow and laborious method.
(v) Transplanting
Transplanting consists of preparing seedlings in nursery and then planting these seedlings
in the prepared field. It is commonly done for paddy, vegetable and flowers. It is very time
consuming operation. Equipment for placing plants in the soil is called trans planter.
(vi) Hill dropping
In this method, seeds are dropped at fixed spacing and not in a continuous stream. Thus
the spacing between plant to plant in a row is constant. In case of drills, the seeds are dropped in
continuous stream and the spacing between plant to plant in a row is not constant.
(vii) Check row planting
It is a method of planting, in which row-to-row and plant-to-plant distance is uniform. In
this method, seeds are planted precisely along straight parallel furrows. The rows are always in
two perpendicular directions. A machine used for check row planting is called check row planter.
SEED DRILL
Seed drill is a machine used for placing the seeds in a continuous stream in furrows at
uniform rate and at controlled depth with an arrangement of covering the seeds with soil.
According to the power source used, seed drills may be classified in to (i) Bullock drawn seed
drills (ii) Tractor drawn seed drills.. According to the type of seed metering done animal drawn
seed drills may be classified into i) manually metered seed drills and ii) mechanically metered
seed drill. . In manually metered seed drills a person drops the seeds in the furrows, in
mechanically metered seed drills a mechanical device called seed metering mechanism is used to
meter the seeds. There are many designs of bullock drawn seed drills and tractor drawn seed drills
which are used for sowing.
53
Gorru Animal Drawn seed drill Tractor drawn seed drill
Functions of a seed drill: Seed drill performs the following functions
1. To carry the seeds
2. To open furrows at uniform depths
3. To meter the seeds
4. To deposit the seeds in furrows in an acceptable pattern
5. To cover the seeds and compact the soil around the seed
SEED CUM FERTILIZER DRILL Seed drills fitted with fertilizer dropping attachments are
called seed-cum-fertilizer drills. They deliver both the seeds and fertilizers simultaneously in an
acceptable pattern. Seed cum fertilizer drill has a large seed box which is divided lengthwise into
two compartments, one for seed and another for fertilizers distribution.
Seed-cum-fertilizer drill:
Functions: Seed cum fertilizer drill performs the following functions
1. To carry the seeds and fertilizer in separate compartments.
2. To open furrows at uniform depths
3. To meter the seeds and fertilizers
4. To deposit the seed and fertilizer in the furrows in an acceptable pattern
5. To cover the seed and fertilizer and compact the soil around the seed
Components of seed drill
A seed drill with mechanical seed metering device mainly consists of: (i) Frame, (ii) Seed
box, (iii) Seed metering mechanism, (iv) Furrow openers, (v) Covering device, and (vi)
Transport wheels.
Frame. The frame is usually made angle iron with suitable braces and brackets. The frame
is strong enough to withstand all types of loads inn working condition.
Seed box. It may be made of mild steel sheet or galvanized iron with a suitable cover. A
small agitator is sometimes provided to prevent clogging of seeds.
Covering device. It is a device to refill a furrow after the seed has been placed in it.
Covering the seeds are usually done by patta, chains, drags, packers, rollers and press
wheels, designed in various sizes and shapes.
Transport wheel. There are two wheels fitted on the main axle. Some seed drills have got
pneumatic wheels also. The wheels have suitable attachments to transmit power to operate
seed dropping mechanism.
54
Seed metering mechanism
The mechanism of a seed drill or fertilizer distributor which delivers seeds or
fertilizers from the hopper at selected rates is called Seed metering mechanism. Seed
metering mechanism may be of several types: (i) Fluted feed type, (ii) Internal double run
type, (iii) Cup feed type, (iv) Cell feed mechanism, (v) Brush feed mechanism, (vi) Auger
feed mechanism, (vii) Picker wheel mechanism, and (viii) Star wheel mechanism.
Most common type of metering devices that delivers a more or less
continuous flow of seeds is fluted roller type or internal double run type. These metering
devices are driven by ground wheel. Some of above metering devices have not been
commercially accepted and popularized.
Rice transplanter
Two methods are used for raising rice cop in India, namely upland cultivation (direct
seeding) and wetland cultivation (direct seeding and seedling transplanting). Rice
transplanting by hand is very tedious, expensive and labour consuming operation. Many
attempts have been made to develop manual as well as self-propelled rice transplanter for
transplanting of rice seedlings in rice growing countries such as Japan, China, Korea and
India. The manual rice transplanter consists of frame, movable tray and seed picking
fingers. Mat type seedlings are placed in the inclined trays. Fingers pick up the seedlings
when they are pushed downward and place them in the prepared soil. Plant-to-plant
spacing can be controller by the operator. Transplanters are available in 5-6 rows with
comb type fingers. It‟s working capacity varied from 0.3-0.4 ha/day and requires two
persons, one for operating the transplanter and other for filling the tray with mat seedlings.
The self propelled rice transplanter consists of air-cooled gas olines engine, main
clutch, running clutch, planting clutch, seeding table, float, star wheel, accelerator lever,
ground wheel, and handle and linkage mechanism. Seedlings are grown in special seedling
trays in controlled environment called mat seedlings. When seedlings are 25-30 day-old,
they are uprooted and placed in slanting seedling trays. Power from the engine is
transferred to main clutch from where it is transferred to planting and a running clutch. The
fingers on four bar linkage mechanism catch 3-4 seedlings at a time separate them from the
mat and place it in the puddle soil. A float supports the machine on the water while
working in the field. There are two end wheels that facilitate the movement of the
transplanter. A marker is provided to demarcate the transplanting width during operation.
The machine maintains row to row and plant to plant spacing. The planting capacity of the
machine is about 0.05-0.1 ha/hr. These transplanters are now commercially available in
India.
Fig. Manual rice transplanter
55
LECTURE. 18
SPRAYERS AND DUSTERS
SPRAYERS
Insect pests and weeds cause considerable damage to the commercial crops. If not
controlled in time, the entire crop gets lost and, therefore, farmers are likely to suffer in
many ways. The mechanical control of weeds is most widely used in India and in many
developing countries due to the availability of farm labour at relatively low rates of wages.
Whereas, the chemical method of plant protection has been universally accepted due to
saving of time, labour and its effectiveness with relatively low expenditure. In developing
countries, combination of chemical and mechanical methods of weed control has been
successfully accepted. The chemicals for protecting the plants from various injurious or
organisms need to be applied on plant surfaces in the form of sprays, dusts, mist etc.
Sprayers and dusters are available in many forms for this purpose.
Sprayer is a machine to apply fluids in the form of droplets. Sprayer is used for the
following purpose: (i) application of fungicides to minimize fungal diseases, (ii)
application of insecticides to control insect pests, (iii) application of herbicides to remove
weeds and (iv) application of micronutrients on the plants. The main functions of sprayer
are: (i) to break the liquid into droplets of effective size, (ii) to distribute them uniformly
over the plants, and (iii) to regulate the amount of liquid to avoid excessive application
Desirable quality of sprayer
(a) The sprayer should produce a steady stream of spray materials in the desired fineness
of the particle so that the plants to be treated may be covered uniformly.
(b) It should deliver the liquid at sufficient pressure so that it reaches all the foliage and
spreads uniformely over the surface of the plant
(c) It should be light weight, sufficiently strong, easily workable and repairable.
Sprayer’s classification
Based on power source, sprayers may be classified as:
(i) Hand operated machines – suitable for small holdings. They are operated at pressure
ranging from 1 to 7kg/cm2.
(ii) Power operated machines – suitable for treating a large area. They are operated at
pressure ranging from 20 to 55kg/cm2.
(iii) Air planes – suitable for large scale work.
Based on spray volume, sprayers may be classified as:
(i) High volume sprayer - More than 400 litres of spray liquid per hectare is used.
(ii) Low volume sprayer – Spray volume ranges between 5 to 400 litres per hectare is
used.
(iii) Ultra-Low volume sprayer – Spray volume less than 5 litres per hectare is used.
Hand operated sprayers may be classified as:
(i) Bucket sprayers
(ii) Knapsack sprayers
(iii) Compression sprayers
Bucket types prayer
It consists of a hand operated single or double acting pump which may be placed into
any ordinary bucket containing spraying solution. Plunger rod is hollow and serves as the
compression chamber. Liquid is discharged in both suction and delivery strokes, hence a
continuous application can be made. One hand operates plunger, while another hand keeps
56
the pump in stable position. This pump is mostly made of brass. It is very light and easily
handled and develops sufficient pressure to spray small gardens and low trees. It develops
a pressure of 4 -10kg/cm2.
Fig. Line diagram of bucket type sprayer
Knap sacks prayer
It is very common type of sprayer, is provided with a pump and a large air chamber
permanently mounted in a 9 to 22.5 lit. tank. The handle of the pump extending over the
shoulder or under the arm of operator, which makes it possible to pump with one hand and
spray with other hand. Spray liquid is delivered through the delivery system, consisting of
lance and nozzle, which is connected with the pump by a flexible hose. A uniform pressure
can be maintained by keeping the pump in operation. It is generally carried on the back of
the operator. It is quite useful for spraying small trees, shrubs and row crops up to 2.5 m
height. These sprayers are useful because of their simplicity in operation, durability and for
diverse use including spraying bushes of tea and coffee. One man can spray about 0.4 – 0.5
ha in a day, thus spraying about 90 lit. of spray liquid. A pressure of 3 -5 kg/cm2 is
maintained in the pressure chamber.
Fig. Diagram of knapsack sprayer
Compression Sprayers
In these types of sprayers, air is compressed into the container by the compression air
pump. When sufficient pressure is developed, then the delivery system is operated to
obtain spray in the form of fine droplets. The compressed air forces the liquid through the
nozzle and the desired type of spray is achieved. For this purpose, the tank is usually filled
to three fourths of its capacity, leaving one-fourth volume for the compressed air. The air
57
pump is fitted vertically inside the container which acts as a force pump.
These can be classified into: i) Hand operated ii) Foot operated iii) Rocker sprayer
Hand operated compression sprayer
These sprayers are similar to the hand atomizer but are adopted for spraying large
quantities of liquids. They are more easily operated than the knapsack sprayer. The typical hand
compression sprayer comprises a tank for holding spray material and compressed air, vertical air
pump with a handle, filling port, spray lance with nozzle and release and shut-off devices.
Besides, it has a metal or plastic skirt which protects the bottom of the tank of the sprayer against
wear and makes the sprayer stable when placed on the ground. It also serves as a base for the
back- rest. In addition, it has adjustable straps. These should be made of cotton belt, leather on
plastic. As the spraying proceeds, the pumping is required to maintain the normal pressure of 2.0
– 3.5 kg/cm2.
Fig. Line diagram of hand compression sprayer
Foot – operated sprayer
It is also called pedal pump. It consists of a plunger assembly, stand, suction hose,
delivery hose and an extension rod with nozzle. One end of suction hose is fitted with a
strainer and other end with a flexible coupling. Similarly, one end of delivery hose is fitted
with a cut-off valve and other end with a flexible coupling. An additional container is
required to hold spray fluid, as this sprayer does not have a built-in tank. Continuous
pedaling is required for uniform spray. It can develop a pressure of 17-21 kg/cm2. It is easy
to operate and can be used for spraying tall crops and fruit trees up to 4 m height. Sprayer
can be used to spray trees up to 6 m height with additional hose.
Fig. Line diagram of foot operated sprayer
58
Rocking sprayer
This type of sprayer consists of a lever operated pump assembly which rests on a
wooden platform. Suction hose with a strainer is immersed in a separate container
containing the spray liquid. Delivery system consists of a separate pressure chamber, a
flexible hose, spray lance, and a spray nozzle. The lever attached to the pump is operated
by the rocking- forward and backward movement of the handle. Pressure is developed in
the pressure chamber, which may attain pressure of 14-18 kg/cm2. Such sprayers are used
for spraying tall plants like coconut, arecanut trees and sugar cane plants. Uniform
spraying can be done if sufficient pressure is maintained in the pressure chamber. It needs
two persons to operate the sprayer, one for operating the pumping system and another for
the application of spray liquid.
Fig. Line diagram of rocking sprayer
HAND ATOMIZER
This sprayer is also ideally suited for home gardens and small fields. It consists of a
container of 0.5 to 3.51it capacity a built in air pump, pressure gauge, nozzle and flow cut off
lever. The tank is to be filled with 3/4th volume. The pump is operated to build pressure in the tank
of 0.15-0.3 kg/cm2. When the flow cut off lever is pressed, the fluid passes through the nozzle and
spraying is done. The application rate ranges from 45 to 100 lit /ha.
59
6 Power sprayers
i) Motorized power sprayer
It is the simplest engine driven sprayer used in agriculture. Power sprayers are operated
usually with IC engines. The prime mower capacity varies from 1 to 5 hp. The pressure pump
is operated by a small power unit ensuring a constant steady pressure. These sprayers are
essentially high volume sprayers and operated at pressure ranges from 20 to 55 kg/cm2. These
machines are usually portable type. It is carried on the back of the operator. It is used for
spraying to all types of field crops most popularly to paddy, groundnut, cotton and vegetable
crops. It consists of a 1.2- 3.0 hp high speed petrol engine, a blower, a 12 lit chemical tank,
delivery hose, fleeted air hose, flow regulator knob and a plastic atomizer grate. The tank is
filled with the required chemical solution. When the engine is started, the blower generates a
high velocity air to which the chemical solution is fed. The chemical mixed air stream is
broken in to fine droplets at the atomizer grate and sprayed.
Motorized Knapsack sprayer
Tractor operated power sprayers
Sometimes, power sprayers are operated by the PTO shaft of the tractor. Power sprayers
can cover much larger area, and do the job efficiently.
A power sprayer essentially consists of: (i) prime mower (ii) tank (iii) agitator (iv)
air chamber (v) pressure gauge (vi) pressure regulator (vii) strainer (viii) boom and (ix)
nozzles.
Prime mower: Prime mower is needed to supply power to the power sprayer. It is usually
internal combustion engine. The power generally varies from 1 to 5HP.
Tank: Steel tank is widely used to prevent corrosion. Plastic tanks are also getting popular
due to freedom from corrosion and ease of moulding into smooth shape. A covered
opening, fitted with a removable strainer is provided for easy filling, inspection and
cleaning. A drain plug is provided at the bottom of tank for draining the liquid.
Agitator: Agitators are needed to agitate the liquid in the tank. Propeller or paddle type
mechanical agitators are provided to agitate the liquid. Horizontal shaft with flat blades
rotating at about 100 to 200 rpm may be used. Paddle tip speed in excess of 2.5 m/s may
cause foaming.
Air chamber: An air chamber is provided on the discharge line of the pump to level out
the pulsations of the pump thereby providing a constant nozzle pressure,
Pressure gauge: It is provided on the discharge line to guide the operator regarding spray
pressure. It should be under specified limit.
Strainer: It is provided in the suction line between the tank and the pump to remove dust,
dirt and other foreign materials.
Boom: It is driven by a tractor, has a long boom in a horizontal plane on which nozzles are
fixed at specified spacing. The boom can be adjusted vertically to suit the height of plants
in different fields.
Nozzle: It is used to break the liquid into the desired spray and deliver it to plants.
60
Fig. Line diagram of power sprayer
6.1 Care and maintenance of sprayer
(i) All washers and packing’s should be soaked in oil or water before use.
(ii) The ends of the nozzle should be unscrewed and cleaned before starting the work.
(iii) When spraying is over, the sprayer should be operated for some time with clean water
to remove sediments from the pressure vessel and the discharge tube.
Special attention has to be paid in case of power sprayers for the following:
(a) Lubricating oil of the engine should be changed for every 100 working hours unless
otherwise advised by the manufacturers.
(b) Do not disturb the packing until a leak is observed.
(c) The spray pump should not be worked at more than recommended pressure.
(d) Oil level in the pump of the engine should be checked every time and all grease points
should be greased once in a day.
(e) Recommended oils and fuels should always be used in the engine.
(f) Nozzle should be thoroughly cleaned after use by blowing air through it.
DUSTERS :
Duster is a machine to apply chemical in dust form. Dusters make use of air streams to
carry pesticides in finely divided dry form on the plants. A duster essentially consists of:
(a) hopper (b) agitator (c) feed control (d) fan or blower and (e) delivery nozzle.
Types of dusters
Dusters are mainly classified in to 2 types i) Hand operated dusters ii) power operated
duster
Hand operated dusters :
i) Plunger type hand duster
ii) Rotar duster
Plunger type hand duster
This machine consists of a chamber for the dust, outlet, a cylinder with piston, piston
rod and handle. Sometimes the dust chamber is placed below the cylinder. By moving the
piston back and forth in the cylinder, dust is forced through the outlet. This type of duster
is suitable for dusting a small area.
Rotary type hand duster
This type of duster is provided with an enclosed fan geared to a hand crank and a
hopper holding the dust. It is equipped with an agitator to stir the dust and a regulator to
control the discharge opening. The duster is usually fastened to the operator by means of
61
shoulder strips. The right hand is used for cranking and the left hand to guide the discharge
tube. These dusters can hold about 3.6 to 4.5 kg of dust and are large enough to treat 0.4 to
0.6 hectare of cropped area in a day. Ordinarily they are not found suitable for dusting over
3 meters height.
Fig. Line diagram of rotary duster
Power operated dusters
The power duster of small capacity is generally mounted on the back of the operator. It
consists of cylindrical container, blower, high speed engine and discharge hose pipe. The
cylindrical container is provided with two compartments, one for gasoline, and the other
for the powder to be dusted. The blower is directly mounted on the crankshaft of the high
speed (4000 rpm) air cooled engine. The air pressure is utilized to agitate the dust in the
container in order to blow it through the flexible hose pipe. The direction of the dust is
regulated by a movable delivery spout suitably fitted with the unit. The dust can be blown
up to about 6 meters height. Such a duster can cover about a hectare in a day. This type of
duster can be converted into a sprayer with little modifications. Portable type power
dusters are also in use. They are mounted on two wheel trolleys.
Care and maintenance of dusters
(i) Duster should be thoroughly cleaned before and after use with a suitable brush
(ii) The hopper should be filled with dust about half of its capacity
(iii) The lid of the hopper should be closed during the operation
(iv) In rotary dusters, the handle should be cranked at 30 to 35 rpm for efficient
performance
(v) Before and after use of the duster, the dust from the fan box, suction pipe and hopper
should be thoroughly blown out
(vi) Pieces of paper, gunny bag and other foreign materials should be prevented from
getting into the hopper
(vii) The agitator parts and dust feed should be occasionally checked for blockage by
foreign matter
62
LECTURE NO.19
WEED CONTROL – INTER CULTIVATION EQUIPMENT
INTERCULTURE TOOLS AND IMPLEMENTS
Weeds can compete with productive crops or pasture, or convert productive land into
unusable scrub. Weeds are also often poisonous, distasteful, produce burrs, thorns or other
damaging body parts or otherwise interfere with the use and management of desirable plants by
contaminating harvests or excluding livestock. They provide competition for space, nutrients,
water and light.
The operations performed in the field after sowing but before harvesting the crop are
called as intercultural operations. Inter culturing is described as breaking the upper surface of soil,
uprooting the weeds (unwanted plants), aerating the soil, thereby promoting the activities of
microorganism and making good mulch, so that moisture inside the field is properly retained from
evaporation.. These operations are accomplished by means of many tools and equipments, such as
hoes, cultivators, harrows, rotary hoes etc.
Implements used for inter cultivation
They are classified into 3
1. Hand hoe
i) Japan harrow
ii) Wheel hoe
iii) Star weeder
2. Animal operated
3. Tractor operated
Hand hoe
Hand hoe is the most popular manually operated weeding tool use in the farm. It consists
of an iron blade and a wooden handle. The operator holds the handle and cuts the soil with the
blade to a shallow depth of 2-3 cm thereby weeds are cut and soil is stirred. The handle is short
(30-40cm long) hence the operator uses the tool in bending posture. The coverage is 5-7 cents per
day.
Japan Harrow / Cono Weeder
It is useful for uprooting and burying weeds in between standing rows of rice crop in
wetlands. It disturbs the topsoil and increases the aeration. The unit consists of a long handle
made of mild steel tube. Two truncated rollers one behind other are fitted at the bottom of the long
handle. The conical rollers have serrated projections on the periphery. A float provided in the
front portion prevents the unit from sinking into, the puddled soil. The cono weeder can also be
used for trampling the green manure crop in addition to weeding operation. They are more
efficient than manual pulling of weeds.
Wheel Hoe
The wheel hoe is a widely accepted weeding tool for weeding and intercultural in row
crops. It is a long handled tool operated by pushes and pull action. The general construction of
wheel hoe comprises of a wheel, tool frame, a set of replaceable tools and a handle Different types
of soil working tools such as straight blade, V -blade, sweep, shovel, etc. can be used for different
63
works namely weeding , soil mulching, stirring etc. .Long handle reduces drudgery to operator.
Wheel reduces energy requirement for pushing. All the soil working components of the tool are
made from medium carbon steel. The coverage is 0.05 ha/day.
Star type weeder : It is suitable for weeding in dry lands. It can be used in garden lands also
when the soil moisture is low (10-15 %). One limitation is that it works well in line sown crops
and not in broadcasted fields. It consists of a blade for cutting the weeds, a fulcrum wheel for
push-pull movement and a long handle for easy operation. Long handle reduces strain on the
operator. The radial arms of the fulcrum wheel are cut in to star like projections and hence the
name star type weeder. Star wheel is designed for loamy soils. The operating width of the
blade is 120 mm. The coverage is 0.05 ha/day.
b) Peg type weeder: It is suitable for weeding in dry lands. It can be used in garden lands also
when the soil moisture is low (10-15 %). One limitation is that it works well in line sown crops
and not in broadcasted fields. It consists of a blade for cutting the weeds, a fulcrum wheel for
push-pull movement and a long handle for easy operation. Long handle reduces strain on the
operator. There are pegs welded on the periphery of the wheel hence the name peg type
weeder. Peg type wheel is designed for clayey soils. The operating width of the blade is 120
mm. The coverage is 0.05 ha/day. Both star type and peg type weeders are also called as dry
land weeders.
64
LECTURE -20 & 21
THRESHERS-COMBINED HARVESTERS- THRESHING TYPES- ALPOD
THRESHER- TYPES OF CYLINDERS
Threshing
It is the process of detaching grains from ear heads or from the plants. Threshing can be
achieved by three methods namely rubbing, impact and stripping. Threshing loosens the grains
and separates from the stalk
Threshing can be done by 3 ways
i) Manual threshing
ii) Threshing by using animals
iii) Machine threshing
Manual Threshing
After harvesting the crop is cut into small bundles and flattened on a flat tabletop stone to
separate grains from the straw. This method is often used in this area where the most harvested
crop is grown.
If the harvested crop is low, the crop is cut into small bundles and beaten with wooden
sticks to separate the seeds. Approximately, 15-20 kg. of seed can be threshed in an hour.
Threshing by using animals:
The harvested produce is dumped on the threshing yard and by suing the animals threshing
can be done by trampling under feet of animals running on the harvested crop. Around 100- 140
kg. of grains can be separated from the straw mainly paddy wheat are threshed under this method
in an hour.
Machine threshing:
Threshers are the most important component of farm mechanization. If threshing is not done
timely, all efforts made by farmers and inputs given to crop goes wasted. Traditional method of
threshing by animal is very slow. It gives low output. Due to low output, the cost of operation is
high and there is a huge loss of grains because of rodents, birds, insects, wind, and untimely rain
and fire hazards. Wheat threshers overcome these difficulties to a great extent. Wheat threshers
are of two type viz. animal-drawn and power threshers. In animal-drawn threshers, Alpod thresher
is a common machine used in different parts of the country. Power wheat thresher is a machine,
which thresh the wheat crop and performs several other functions such as:
• Feed the harvest crop to the threshing cylinder
• Thresh the grain out of the ear head
• Separate the grain from the straw
• Clean the grain
• Make ‘bhusa’ suitable of animal feeding.
ALPOD THRESHER
Threshing of paddy, wheat and barely requires very less energy and low cost for this in
Gujarat state in alpod village one farmer has developed a machine which is called as alpod
thresher
‘Olpad’ threshers are also used for threshing wheat crop. A pair of bullocks pulls it around
over the dried crop spread in a circular form on the threshing ground. Threshing is continued till
the entire material becomes a homogeneous mixture of grain and ‘bhusa’ (chaff). It consists of
about 20 circular grooved discs each of 45-cm diameter and 3-mm thickness placed 15 cm apart
in three rows. An operator’s seat is provided on the frame to control the movement of animals. All
discs are mounted staggered to give more effective cutting of the straw. It has 3 or 4 wheels to
facilitate its movement from one place to other. Threshing by this thresher is fairly efficient and
cheap but is quite slow with low output capacity. This machine can be used for threshing wheat,
barley, gram etc.
65
Pedal operated Paddy Threshers:
Paddy thresher of pedal operated type consists of mainly a well-balanced cylinder with a
series of wire loops fixed on wooden slates. It has got gear drive mechanism to transmit power.
While cylinder is kept in rotary motion at high speed, the paddy bundles of suitable sizes are
applied to the teeth. The grains are separated by combining as well as by hammering action of
threshing teeth. Paddy is threshed due to impact and rubbing action between threshing drawn
loops and concave screen. The grains are cleaned with the help of a fan and cleaned grain goes
down through the grain outlet at the bottom of the thresher. They are available in different horse
power range.
Pedal operated paddy thresher.
Power thresher
Different parts of a thresher and their functions
A mechanical thresher consists of the following parts:
i). Feeding device (chute/tray/trough/hopper /conveyor)
ii). Threshing cylinder (hammers/spikes/rasp-bars/wire-loops/syndicator)
iii). Concave (woven wire mesh/punched sheet/welded square bars)
iv). Blower/aspirator
v). Sieve-shaker/straw-walker.
Working principle of a thresher
During operation, the crop material is slightly pushed into the threshing cylinder through
the feeding chute, which gets into the working slit created between the circumference of the
revolving drum having attached spikes and the upper casing. The speed of the spikes is greater
than the plant mass due to which they strike the latter which results in part of the grain being
separated from straw. Simultaneously, the drum pulls the mass through the gap between the
spikes and the upper casing with a varying speed. The angle iron ribs on the other hand, restrain
the speed of the travelling of stalks clamped by the spikes. Due to this the spikes move in the
working slit with a varying speed in relation to the shifting mass of material, which is
simultaneously shifted, with a varying speed with respect to the upper casing. As a result, the
material layer is struck several times by the spikes against the ribs, causing threshing of the major
66
amount of grains and breaking stalks into pieces. As the material layer shifts towards the
progressively converging slit of lower concave, its size reduces. The vibration amplitudes,
therefore, decrease where as the speed of the layer increases. This causes mutual rubbing of the
ear stalks, as well as rubbing of the ears against the edges of the concave bars and causes breaking
of stalks depending on the concave clearance. Since the system is closed, the thicker stalk, which
cannot be sieved through the concave, again joins the fresh stalk and the same process is repeated
until the stalk size is reduced to the extent that it can pass through the concave apertures. Thus
fine bruised straw is produced. The effective threshing process means that the loss of un-threshed
kernels ejected with the straw through the concave and the loss of grain damage should be low
and the amount of the material passed through the concave should be high.
Threshing cylinder
It is the most important component of thresher. It has balanced rotating assembly
comprising rasp beater bar or spikes on its periphery and their support for threshing the crop
Types of Cylinders
1) Peg tooth
2) Wire loop
3) Rasp bar
4) Angle bar
5) Hammer mill
67
Peg tooth
• The teeth on the concave & cylinder are so arranged that the cylinder teeth pass
midway between the staggered teeth on the concave
• The clearance between the cylinder & the concave is adjusted according to the
requirement
• As the stalks pass through the clearance space, the grains get separated from the head
due to impact action between the teeth
Wire loop
• Cylinder is studded with number of wire loops through out its outer periphery
• Mostly used on paddy thresher
Angle bar
• Cylinder is equipped with angle iron bars, helically fitted on the cylinder
The bars have rubber pads on their faces
• The clearance between cylinder and concave unit at the entrance is from 13 mm to 19 mm
and reduces to 6 to 9 mm only
Hammer mill type
• Beaters are in the shape of hammer mill
• Beaters are attached with the beater arm at the tip
o Beater arms are rigidly fixed to a hub which is mounted on main shaft
Rasp bar cylinder
o Cylinder has corrugated bars round it
o Threshing is accomplished between corrugated cylinder bars and stationary bars of
the concave portion
o Rotating cylinder takes the grains out from the head as it is drawn over the bars on
the concave unit
o Usually 6 to 8 bars are spirally fixed on the cylinder
Safety precautions in threshing operation: -
1. Leave all guards and shields in place when operating the machine
2. Before cleaning, servicing, or repairing the machine, disconnect the power to the unit.
3. Use only properly grounded outlet (electric only)
4. Keep hands out of threshing belt entry area
5. Do not wear loose clothing when operating this machine. Clothing can be grabbed by
chain drives or rotating shafts and severe injury can result
6. Keep hands and feet away from chain drives and v-belts when machine is running
7. Lock brake when using (if equipped).
Guide lines for maintenance of a crop thresher:
1. Lubricate cylinder and fan bearings with good-quality general purpose grease every 25
hours of operation. Periodically apply a small amount of oil to all hinge points.
2. Inspect the machine regularly for loose, worn, or damaged peg teeth, concave bars,
cylinder, discharge paddles and other parts, and tighten, repair, or replace them
immediately. Missing bolts or nuts must also be replaced.
3. Reduce belt tensions by loosening the idler pulley and engine mounting bolts when the
machine will not be used for an extended period to minimize deterioration.
4. Check engine crankcase oil level at least every 4 operating hours and follow the engine
manufacturer’s recommendations for oil change intervals and oil grade. Be sure the
Recommended oil level is to be maintained.
5. Service the air cleaner, fuel filter, fuel line, carburetor, and spark plug regularly
according to engine manufacturer’s instructions.
68
Guide lines for storage of a threshing machine
1. Clean the machine thoroughly.
2. Remove belts and store in a dry place.
3. Store the machine in a clean, dry location and cover to reduce damage from dust
accumulation.
4. Paint the parts which need repainting.
5. Clean and apply oil to exposed metal surfaces to prevent rusting.
6. Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations on engine storage.
All crop thresher- Component of a thresher and Working principle:
A mechanical crop thresher mainly consists of the following component/ devices:
a) Feeding device (chute/tray/trough/hopper/conveyor)
b) Threshing cylinder (hammers/spikes/rasp-bars/wire-loops/syndicator)
c) Concave (woven-wire mesh/punched sheet/welded square bars)
d) Blower/aspirator
e) Sieve-shaker/straw-walker.
Working Principle of thresher:
The crop is fed from the feeding tray into the threshing cylinder. The threshing cylinder is
fitted with spikes/bars/hammers or wire-loops around its periphery according to the type of
thresher. During operation, the crop material is slightly pushed into the threshing cylinder through
the feeding chute, which gets into the working slit created between the circumference of the
revolving drum having attached spikes and the upper casing. The speed of the spikes is greater
than the plant mass due to which they strike the latter which results in part of the grain being
separated from straw. Simultaneously, the drum pulls the mass through the gap between the
spikes and the upper casing with a varying speed. The angle iron ribs on the other hand, restrain
the speed of the travelling of stalks clamped by the spikes. Due to this the spikes move in the
working slit with a varying speed in relation to the shifting mass of material, which is
simultaneously shifted, with a varying speed with respect to the upper casing. As a result, the
material layer is struck several times by the spikes against the ribs, causing threshing of the major
amount of grains and breaking stalks into pieces, and also accelerating them into the inlet of the
lower concave.
As the material layer shifts towards the progressively converging slit of lower concave, its
size reduces. The vibration amplitudes, therefore, decrease, where as the speed of the layer
increases. This causes mutual rubbing of the ear stalks, as well as rubbing of the ears against the
edges of the concave bars and causes breaking of stalks depending on the concave clearance.
Since the system is closed, the thicker stalk, which cannot be sieved through the concave, again
joins the fresh stalk and the same process is repeated until the stalk size is reduced to the extent
that it compass through the concave apertures. Thus fine bruised straw is produced.
The entire or a portion of threshed material falls from the concave on to top sieve of the
cleaning system. Due to reciprocating motion of top sieve lighter accumulate at the top and grain
falls on to the bottom sieve. In case of spike tooth thresher, an aspirator blower sucks out the
lighter material from the top sieve and throws it out from blower outlet. The sieves help in further
cleaning of the grain by allowing heavier straw to overflow.
69
LECTURE -22 & 23
WINNOWING, CHAFF CUTTER AND SUGARCANE CRUSHER
Wind winnowing is an agricultural method developed by ancient cultures for separating
grain from chaff. It is also used to remove weevils or other pests from stored grain. Threshing, the
separation of grain or seeds from the husks and straw is the step in the chaff-removal process that
comes before winnowing. Winnowing can be done by manually with a shaped basket shaken to
raise the chaff, a winnowing fork or shovel, winnowing Fans and by using winnowers’
"Winnowing the chaff" is a common expression. In its simplest form it involves throwing
the mixture into the air so that the wind blows away the lighter chaff, while the heavier grains fall
back down for recovery. Techniques included using a winnowing fan (a shaped basket shaken to
raise the chaff) or using a tool (a winnowing fork or shovel) on a pile of harvested grain
Winnowing, the process of separating quality grains from chaff, is a crucial process in the
cultivation of paddy. The traditional way of winnowing is making the dried grains fall from a
height using shovels and a sieve. The quality grains which are heavy fall vertically while the
weightless chaff and straw get blown away by the wind. Thus, winnowing is effective only when
there is a wind. Farmers often have to wait for hours for the wind to blow before they could start
the process of winnowing
Winnowing by Fan:
Winnowing fan are various type of hand operated and pedal operated being manufactured
by many firms in India. The number of the blades on their impellers is either 3 or 4.The diameter
of the impeller is varies about .90 to 1.25 m pedal operated winnowing fan at about 350 rpm
indicate that the maximum air velocity is found in a zone of 1.2 to 1.8 m distance from the fan.
Mostly the blades are made of mild steel sheet and their frames are made of either wood or
welded steel or a combination of the two in order to increase the speed of rotation various driving
mechanism are employed, namely chain and sprocket, V belt pulleys and single or double
reduction gear.
Grain winnower
This machine winnows the paddy already threshed by a paddy thresher or other means. It
has a feeding hopper at the top to receive the threshed paddy with other impurities. It discharges
the threshed paddy over a scalper and removes bigger size impurities. A blower provided at
bottom sends a stream of air against the grain falling through the scalper, which separates the
straw, chaff and other impurities. The dust, chaff and straw are collected separately and cleaned
paddy is taken out through another outlet near the bottom of the unit. The capacity of unit is 625
kg/h and the unit is operated by one hp motor.
70
Paddy winnower
The machine winnows paddy already threshed by the paddy thresher or by other means. It
has a feed hopper at the top to receive the threshed paddy, chaff and straw bit. A blower provided
at the bottom sends a stream of air which separates straw, chaff and other impurities. The dust,
chaff and straw come out through an opening and cleaned paddy is taken out through another
spout. The unit is continuous type and operated by one hp electric motor.
Chaff Cutter
Green fodder crops are essential food requirement for on-farm animals. These fodder crops
are harvested from the field daily either by sickles or reapers. Then crop is collected from the field
and carried to the farmhouse where it is cut into small pieces. This is done to save storage, to aid
in curing and to make it more palatable. The cutting of fodder into small pieces is done either
manually using ‘Gandasa’ or by using manually or power operated chaff cutters. Depending on
the type of cutting head, chaff cutters may be classified as cylinder cutting head machine and
flywheel type cutting head machine. According to power used chaff cutters are classified as hand
chaff cutters, animal operated chaff cutters and power chaff cutters or silage cutters.
Cylinder type cutting head chaff cutter: It is commonly used on power chaff cutters. This type
of cutting heads is sometimes used on field forage harvesters that cut the fodder crop from the
field, chop and blow into wagon. The machine consists of four spiral-shaped knives on a
revolving cylinder, which looks like the rotary lawnmower. The knives can be sharpened without
being removed from the cylinder. The size of chaff can be adjusted by changing the speed of feed
rollers provided adjacent to the shear plate. The chopped material fall into housing from where it
is stored at a proper place. This type of machine is not commonly used in India and is more costly
as compared to flywheel type machine.
71
Flywheel type chaff cutter:
It consists of a cast iron flywheel and radial mounted knives. Straight knives are used on
power chaff cutters and curved knives on hand chaff cutters. The number of knives varies from
two to six depending upon the type of chaff cutters and size of chaff desired. Hand operated chaff
cutters are provided with two knives only. Some power chaff cutters of large size have blower
used for silo filling. The average working speed of hand chaff cutter is 50 rpm with one knife and
35 rpm with two knives. The power operated chaff cutters are operated at working speed of 600-
1000 rpm. For proper cutting of silage, knife should operate close to the shear plate without
striking. Clearance between the shear plate and knife can be adjusted by a set of screws provided
for the purpose. The knife is fastened on the flywheel by means of two or three counter sunk
bolts.
The size of chaff or length of cut can be changed by changing the speed of feed rollers.
Hand operated chaff cutters are provided with a two speed worm for adjusting the length of cut
where as two or three speed gearbox has been provided on power operated chaff cutters. Reducing
or increasing the number of knives on the flywheel can also changes the length of cut of silage.
This can be done easily on the hand operated chaff cutters. On power operated chaff cutters,
length of cut of silage can be adjusted by increasing the speed of cutter head. The length of cut of
silage varies from 20-40 mm and for green fodder 25-50 mm or sometimes more.
The feeding mechanism of a power operated chaff cutter consists of an apron and two feed
rollers. Aprons are generally provided with metal or wooden slates to give a positive feed. The
length of the table on which the apron moves is about 2 m so as to accommodate tall grasses or
fodder crops. Spring-loaded feed rollers are provided to compress and feed the uncut material to
the cutting head. Generally, corrugated or toothed rolls are preferred. Hand operated machines are
not provided with aprons. A feed-table or merely a feed box is considered to be enough for this
machine and the feeding is done by hand. Feed rollers of the hand-operated machine have variable
spacing and the worm mounted on the flywheel shaft operates them. The bullock operated chaff
cutters is similar to hand operated one but it is provided with a smaller diameter flywheel on
which two or three knives are mounted. By means of a set of gears and universal joints, the slow
speed of bullocks is utilized to operate the machine at about 250 rpm and thus its capacity
becomes 4 to 6 times more than that of the hand operated machine.
72
The capacity of field chopper can be calculated by:
C = WHLNRK
Where,
C = capacity of field chopper, kg/h or tones /h
L = length of Chaff cut, cm
W = width of throat, cm
H = height of throat, cm
N = number of knives
R = rpm of flywheel
K Constant value 20 x 10-6
Care and adjustments of hand chaff cutter:
Since the hand operated chaff cutter is a simple and useful machine, it is very popular among
Indian farmers. In order to get the most efficient operation for a long time; it must be properly
installed on a rigid foundation preferably under shed. Many farmers have converted hand chaff
cutters into power chaff cutters by using 1 hp electric motor or small engine.
The following general procedure of maintenance and lubrication should be followed:
1. Before the machine is put into operation, its gears and bearings should be lubricated
2. The knives should be sharpened by hand filing. If the cutting edge has become too
blunt, it should be sharpened on a grinder to the proper bevel only on one side
3. The clearance between the knives and the shear plate should be adjusted for the
effective cutting
4. Loose nuts, bolts, and screws should be tightened to avoid accidents
5. After the day’s work is over, dirt from the gears and bearing parts and moisture from the
knives should be wiped off
6. While the machine is idle, its flywheel should be kept locked so that the children do not
operate it
7. Most of the cast iron parts and particularly the flywheel of the machine are quite
susceptible to breakage by hammering, which should always be avoided
8. The moving parts should be properly lubricated
9.
Problem 1: Find the capacity of a field chopper by using following data
Chaffer width while coming from roller / width of throat in cm = 25 cm
Thickness of the chaffer / length of the throat = 12 cm
Length of the chaff cut in cm = 1.25 cm
Number of knives = 3
Fly wheel rpm = 750 rpm
Constant value K = 20 X 10-6 ( Answer : 16.875 tones /h)
73
Sugarcane crusher machine
Based on the energy used the crushers are
1. Man operated
2. Animal operated
3. Power operated
They are two types
1. Vertical Roller type
2. Horizontal roller type
Main parts are:
In every engine 3 types of rollers are arranged
1. King roller
2. Crushing roller
3. Extraction roller
4. Bucket
5. Electric Motor
In the power operated machine the king roller is connected to the motor with help of the
shaft and wheels of the machine. The compression roller and extraction rollers are connected to
the king roller with the help of the wheels. But the crushing roller and extraction roller are not
connected with the help of wheels. The King Roller is in a stable position. The remaining two
rollers are separated by a size of cane to make the space between the roller for shorter or longer.
Two or more canes are sent between the King Roller and the Crushing Roller to squeeze
the juice. This results in a thicker layer on top of the cane and the juice is better squeezed out. The
remaining juice is then rolled by the King Roller and the Extraction Roller comes out. The juice is
thus rolled into a bucket mounted on the bottom of the machine by a plate placed under the roller.
As a result, the roller is used to hold the mine vertically or horizontally due to which the canes are
crushed hardly.
Care should be taken while running the Crusher:
1. The gap between the roller is very less then quantity of the juice will be less
2. The motor runs with speed of 3km/hr in that at a time we can feed the canes at a time.
3. Rollers need to make sure the speed is high or low.
4. If the grooves on the roller are broken, replace the roller immediately.
5. Canes should be placed between the rollers without stopping.
74
LECTURE. 24
CASTOR DECORTICATOR-MAIZE SHELLER
Castor decorticator
Castor seed can be separated by following methods
1. Beating by wooden sticks
2. Hand operated machines
3. Power operated machines
Beating by wooden sticks :
When less quantity to be threshed the castor nuts to be spread on the threshing yard and
beaten with the wooden sticks to separate the seed from the castor nuts. A man can thresh 100
to 125 kg. in a day and there is a chance of damage of seed.
Castor sheller cum winnower
The machine consists of a teak wood cylinder and concave, a feed hopper, blower, sieve
assembly and 2 hp electric motor. Unthreshed pods are retained on the top of sieve and come
out from chute at the end of the sieve. Partially and completely shelled one pass through the
top sieve. The middle sieve retains the partially shelled pods and allows the shelled beans to
pass through. The partially shelled pods come out from chute at the end of middle sieve. The
lighter hulls are blown out by the blast of air form the blower. The shelled bean comes out
form the chute at the middle of the bottom perforated sheet. The perforations allow sand
particles; weed seed etc. to be sieved out of the threshed castor bean. Capacity of the unit is
250 kg/hr.
Castor Sheller
The sheller consists of a wooden ribbed cylinder of 320 mm length and 380 mm diameter,
concave, cylinder cover, feeding chute discharge cute, drive mechanism and crank. The clearance
between the concave and cylinder adjustable depending on the size of bean. Shelling drum is
operated by crank through a gear unit which shells the castor pods. Manual clearing is done. The
unit is operated by two labours. Capacity of the unit is one quintal per day.
75
Castor Sheller
Maize Sheller (Power operated)
Maize Sheller is used to separate grain from cobs. Before shelling, the foliage is removed
manually. Maize shellers are either manually operated or power operated. A power operated
maize Sheller uses 30-36 cm diameter cylinder of 80-100 cm lengths. On the periphery of the
cylinder, there are pegs that remove the grain from cobs using axial flow movement. The cylinder
speed is maintained in between 500-600 rpm. The cob moves toward the end of sheller from
feeding side and during this process grains are rubbed against drum and posses through the
concave. Blower is provided to remove lighter material. Concave clearance and cylinder speed
can vary and adjusted as per recommendation.
Maize shellers are used for all types of maize varieties local as well as hybrid and
composites. Maize shellers are of two types viz. spring type and cylinder type. Spring-type sheller
consists a rotating fluted cylinder, a rotating disc and a spring pressure plate. The cobs are fed to
rotating fluted cylinder and kernels are removed from cobs as they move in between cylinder and
disc. Blower blow off the light material and clean grain is collected separately. These shellers are
available in various sizes such as domestic shellers, single-hole and double-hole shellers.
Domestic sheller is a hand operated and available with small farmer for shelling of small quantity
of maize.
The cylinder-type sheller consists of a cylinder with lugs, concave assembly and a blower
unit. Spiral ribs are provided in the cylinder for smooth movement of cobs. Cobs are fed in
between cylinder and concave and kernels are removed by the action of lugs. Blower cleans the
lighter materials and small pieces of cobs and clean grain is collected. The 5-10 hp electric motor
or tractor can operate the machine.
76
LECTURE. 25
GROONDNUT DECORTICATOR
Groundnut decorticator
It used for taking ground nut kernels from pods. It can be operated by a tractor PTO an
electric motor or a diesel engine. It consists of a hopper, double crank lever mechanism, an
oscillating sector and a blower. On oscillating sector cast iron shoes with projecting pegs are
fitted. Pods fed through hopper are shelled between oscillating sector and fixed perforated
concave. Mixture of kernels and shells is subjected to air blast from blower. Kernels are collected
through o spout at bottom shells are blown-off clearance between concave and oscillating sector
can be adjusted to suit pods of varying sizes and varieties.
77
LECTURE 26 & 27
DRYING-TYPES OF DRYING-LSU DRYER
Generally, the crop is harvested when the moisture content is between 24 to 25 percent.
This reduces the rate of grain loss and minimizes grain loss during harvesting, but the amount of
moisture content of the grain should be 12 to 14 % required to be stored for long periods of time
is safe. Drying is the phase of the post-harvest system during which the product is rapidly dried
until it reaches the “safe-moisture” level. The aim of drying is to lower the moisture content of the
grain for safe storage and further processing.
Importance of drying
• Permits long time storage of grain without deterioration
• Permits continuous supply of product thro’ out the year
• Permits early harvest which reduces field damage and shattering loss
• Permits the farmers to have better quality product
• Makes products available during off season
Methods of drying
For drying grain, essentially two methods
• Natural drying and Artificial drying
Natural Drying:
The natural drying method consists essentially of exposing the threshed products to the air
(in sun or shade). To obtain the desired moisture content, the grain is spread in thin layers on a
drying-floor, where it is exposed to the air. The duration may vary depending upon the moisture
content required for safe storage. To achieve uniform drying, the grain must be stirred frequently,
especially if it is in direct sunlight. The relative humidity of the ambient air must not be higher
than 70% for effective drying.
Some important points to remember:
1) Uncontrolled, non uniform drying resulting in sun checks or cracks in kernels. When the dried
grains are milled, they yield large quantities of broken. 2) The process is dependent on the suns
energy which is normally not available during the monsoon season 3) Sun drying requires large
numbers of unskilled labours
4) Considerable amount of paddy is lost to birds, rats, during sun drying
5) Sun drying requires fuel neither nor mechanical energy, and hence the cost of drying per unit of
paddy is relatively low 6) Sun drying requires large areas hence not suitable for rice mills located
in cities (due to scarcity of space).
Sun drying of raw paddy is done either before the stacks are cut or drying the grains after harvest
and threshing
Advantages
• Very low initial cost
• Reduces the cost of drying
• Flexible capacity
Disadvantages
• Slow drying process
• Depends on the weather
• High risk of contamination e Possible loss due to birds and rodents
• High labour input
78
Mechanical drying
This process utilize mechanical means for paddy by ventilating natural or heated air
through the grains mass to accomplish the removal of excess moisture from it Its features are
1) The rate of drying grain can be controlled by adjusting the temperature of hot air ventilating
through the grain mass. The process therefore marked possible the reduction of temperature and
moisture stresses developed during the drying process which are responsible for the cracks in the
kernels
2) Grains can be dried irrespective of weather conditions.
3) The process is automatic and requires unskilled labor, except a trained person to operate the
dryer
4) There are practically no losses to insects, birds and rodents.
5) The process requires fuel and electrical or mechanical power to drive the air blower, elevators,
etc. Therefore the cost of drying per unit of paddy is relatively higher compared to sun drying
6) Mechanical drying requires very little space for operation hence suitable for modern rice
complexes
7) Mechanical drying in conjunction with early harvest improves the milling quality of paddy
considerably
Drying systems
A) Thin layer drying
Thin layer drying refers to the drying of grains which are entirely exposed to the air, moving
through the grains
Special features of thin layer drying
1) Grain depth should be not more than 20 cm
2) At a given relative humidity, the drying rate is proportional to the difference between grain
moisture content (MC) and equilibrium moisture content (Dry basis)
3) Rate of drying is proportional to the difference between vapor pressure of grain and vapor
pressure of drying air
4) At given moisture content the drying rate is proportional to the difference between the dry bulb
temperature of air in equilibrium with the grain
The drier which uses the principles of thin layer drying is known as continuous flow drier.
Continuous flow drier is of two types
1) Non mixing columnar drier
2) Mixing drier
B) Deep bed drying process
Deep bed drying process includes bin or batch type driers. When the drying air has to pass
through a layer of more than 20 cm thickness of grain, it is called deep bed drying process. The
natural or heated air is forced through the bottom of the bin upward through the wet grain. The
temperature humidity saturated vapor pressure and specific volume of drying air change as the air
passes through the grain. Consequently, the drying potential of air decreases as it moves upwards.
Deep bed drying method may be thought as a process of drying grain in several thin layers, in
which the temperature and humidity of air, entering and leaving each layer vary with time
depending upon the stage of drying.
This type of drying system consists of the following:
a) Structure for holding grain
b) Suitable fan or blower for supplying air
c) Air distribution system
d) Heating unit
Circular bins made of plain or corrugated steel sheets are commonly used in this system. The
main consideration is to provide a tight structure, which prevents leakage of air and moisture
through floors and walls
Two types of air distribution system may be used for this drier
a) Perforated or bottom open ducts placed on a solid floor
b) Perforated false floor with air introduced below it
79
Types of dryers:
1. Sack dryer 2. Bin dryer 3. Continuous flow dryer or
1. Sack dryer
Sack dryer is best for small quantity of grains to dry. In this process large rooms are prepared
with big holes and are covered with the steel frame with wholes on it for the air flow. The air will
be passed into this with the help of the power operated motor attached blower will blow the air
into it which will touches the grain their by the moisture will be evaporated by this grain moisture
will be reduced. Generally 45oc temperature air will be bowled into it.
2. Louisiana State University (LSU) dryer:
This is a continuous flow – mixing type of grain dryer which is popular in India and the
U.S.A. It was developed at Louisiana State University Baton Rouge, USA in 1949.
Construction- It consists of:
(1) A rectangular drying chamber fitted with air ports and the holding bin.
(2) An air blower with duct.
(3) Grain discharging mechanism with a hopper bottom and
(4) An air heating system
(1) Rectangular bin : Usually the following top square sections of the bin ate used for the design
of LSU dryers:
(i) 1.2 m x1.2 m, (ii) 1.5 m x 2.1 m.
(ii) 1.8 m x 1.8 m and (iv) 2.1 m x 2.1 m.
The rectangular bin can be divided into two sections, namely, top holding bin and bottom
drying chamber. (2) Air Distribution system: Layers of inverted though or V-shaped channels
(called inverted V-ports) are installed in the drying chamber. Alternate rows of these ports are
opened on the blower and closed on the exhaust end. These are called inlet ports Hot air enters
the drying chamber through these ports. The other alternative rows of ports are closed on the
blower end and are opened on the exhaust end. These are called outlet or exhaust ports as the
drying air goes out though these ports. The inlet and outlet ports are of uniform sizes and
equal in number with equal in number with equal spacing in between them. Usually the inlet
ports are given in 3 columns and outlet ports in 4 columns (2 columns of full size ports and 2
column of half-size ports). The number of ports containing a dryer varies widely depending on
the size of the dryer. The inlet and outlet ports are arranged one below the other in a zig-zag
path, so that when paddy flows down between these ports, it takes a zig-zag path. Hot air
enters the inlet ports from the blower end. Since these ports are closed on exhaust end, the hot
air from these channels or ports flows down through the paddy and enter the outlet ports and
leave the drying Chamber through exhaust side. Some degree of mixing of hot air and paddy
occurs in this chamber while air is flowing across it in zig-zag path and paddy flowing
downwards. Three fluted rolls are attached at the bottom, which are rotated at a slow speed.
The discharge of the paddy is regulated with these fluted rolls. To provide hot air for drying,
fuel is burnt to raise the ambient air temperature. Heat may be supplied by the direct fired
burners or director or indirect heat exchangers.
80
In general, the capacity of the dryer varies from 2 to 12 ton of grain, but sometimes dryers
of higher capacities are also installed. Accordingly power requirement varies widely.
Recommended air flow rate is 70 m3/min/ton of dry paddy and optimum air temperatures are
60-700 C and 850 C for raw and parboiled paddy respectively.
81
LECTURE 28
RICE MILLING
Rice milling is the process of removing the husk and bran layer to produce white rice. Rice
milling can be undertaken as:
• A one step milling process where the husk and the bran are removed in one pass and white rice
is produced directly from the paddy.
• A two-step process where the husk and the bran are removed separately and brown rice is
produced as an intermediate product.
• A multistage process where rice passes through a number of different operations and machines
from paddy to white rice.
The shell covering the rice grain kernel is known as husk and the process by which this is
removed without to be objected damage in the rice kernel is what is termed as deshelling
operation and the machines employed to carry out this are named either as huskers or as shellers.
At present three types of such machines are used in India for the purpose and they are
i) Under runner disc shellers
ii) Rubber roller shellers
iii) Hullers
Under runner disc sheller
The under-runner husker is very common in Asia. This machine has two steel discs, which
have an emery coating. The upper disc is stationary and fixed to the cast iron housing. Paddy
flows from a centrally located hopper between the abrasive surfaces of the revolving lower disc
and the stationary upper disc. Resistance between the emery surface on the discs and the paddy
grains removes the husk leaving the brown rice kernel. Brown rice and husks are then discharged
circumferentially over the revolving disc and exit through an outlet. This machine is very
economical to run, produces a moderate amount of cracked or broken grain, and has a hulling
efficiency of about 85-90%.
Advantages:
• Capacity is higher than steel huller type.
• Cracked and broken grain is less than steel huller type.
• More power efficient than steel huller type.
• Easy to operate.
• Low operation cost.
• Machine is very durable.
• It is nearly comparable to rubber rolls huller
Disadvantages:
• Machine is very heavy and requires a moderate size operating space.
• This process scratches the rice kernel.
• As the abrasive stone wears, sand and silicon dislodges and mixes with rice and bran.
• Rice recovery less than the rubber rolls huller.
• Huller efficiency in this machine is 85-90%
82
Rubber roller huller:
The rubber-roller huller is the most efficient hulling machine. As the name suggests two
rubber rollers of the same diameter are operated at different speeds to remove the husk from the
paddy. One roller has a fixed position and the other is adjustable to meet the desired clearance.
The adjustable roller rotates slightly slower than the fixed roller. Rubber-roll hullers have an
aspirator in the base of the machine to separate the hulls from the brown rice. The roll diameter
varies from 150 to 250 mm and the roller width from 60 to 250 mm. The correct clearance is
dependent on the varietal characteristics and the width and length of paddy. This method of
hulling can achieve hulling efficiencies of 85% to 90% with minimum broken or cracked grain.
This type of machine is now widely used in developed countries.
Advantages:
• Reduce breakage of milled kernels.
• High hulling efficiency.
• By-products are free from sand and silicon.
• Bran also in higher quantities compared to disc huller
• Very compact in comparison to disc huller.
• Less vibration
Disadvantages:
• Cost to purchase
• Cost of rubber rollers
Hullers
Almost all the huller rice mills are having one or more hullers with winnower grader. The
huller consists of a solid fluted cylinder rotating at 700 to 800 rpm within a hollow stationery
cylinder in the lower half of which is the perforated iron sieve with slots of 1.5- 7.5 mm. The flute
on the cylinder is so arranged as to carry the paddy to the centre from the feeding end, get it
milled by scoring action at the centre of the cylinder and then to carry it to the other end where the
milled rice is discharged. The hullers are used first for shelling by keeping a wide clearance
between the cylinder and the blade. Each huller is driven by a 20 to 25 hp motor using belt drive.
The winnower has got a blower which is driven normally by a 50 hp motor. The husk is blown off
and the result mixture of rice and broken is graded by a reciprocating motion of the grader
attached with the winnower. The eccentric shaft attached with blower shakes the grader. The
grader is fitted with two or three sets of sieves for grading the rice into various fractions
Advantages of Hullers
i) Investment required for unit capacity is extremely low
ii) It is manufactured in India without any foreign collaboration
iii) It needs very small space to be installed
iv)It is very single in design
v) It can be used both as whitener or polisher
Disadvantages:
83
i) It gives low head yield, and large brokens and low total yield of rice from paddy
ii) During the first shelling operation, the outer layers of the rice kernel and along with it 20 to
30% of the total oil are also removed and thrown away along with husk
iii) Germs, bran and husks get mixed together
iv) Separation of paddy from rice cannot be achieved in the machine
v) Power consumption per ton of paddy is quite high
Polishing
A paddy grain after being properly deshelled, remains coated with a thin layer of bran, the
germ being loosely adhered to the rice kernel. This bran layer displays a dull appearance to rice
grains, minimum fraction of which is to be removed to bring about the acceptable appearance to
the consumers and at the same time to make the grain suitable for human consumption, since bran
content of rice, as it is a bit too much to be easily digested by human beings. The process by
which this removal of bran is accomplished is known as whitening of rice and the machine doing
this operation a rice whitener
Types of rice whiteners:
i) Grinding type
ii) Friction type
iii) Combination of friction and grinding type
Grinding type can be grouped into two categories:
a) Vertical cone rice whitening machine
b) Horizontal rice whitening machine, Huller is included under the friction type units
84
LESSON NO – 29
GRAIN STORAGE STRUCTURES
Grain is generally stored either in bags or in bulk. A combined system of bag-cum-bulk
storage is also practiced in some parts of the country. In villages the bulk storage system is more
common than the storage in bags which is considered to be a practicable method· of storing grain
in the government go downs as well as in trade. The following three types of storage structures for
storage of grains.
• Traditional storage structures
• Improved storage structures
• Modern storage structures
• Farm Silos
•
DIFFERENT TYPES OF STORAGE STRUCTURES
Morai type storage structure
Morai type of structure is used for the storage of paddy, maize and sorghum (jowar) in the
rural areas of eastern and southern regions of India. Its capacity varies from 3·5 to 18 ton. These
structures are very similar to the shape of an inverted cone. They are placed on a raised platform
supported on wooden or masonry pillars. The improved type of structure consists of a circular
wooden plank floor supported on pillars by means of timber joints. The planks are joined together
with lap joints. All around the wooden floor a 22 gauge corrugated metal cylinder of 90 cm height
is nailed to it. The edge of the cylinder is flushed with the bottom end of the floor. Inside the
cylinder, 7·5 cm diameter ropes made of paddy straw or similar material are placed, beginning
from the floor level upto a height of 90 cm. Then bamboo splits are placed vertically along the
inner surface without leaving any gap between them. The height of the bamboo splits is equal to
the total height of the structure. Keeping the bamboo splits in position, the grain is poured in up to
the height of the metal cylinder. By then the bamboo splits are held erect in position. Now the
winding of the rope as well as the pouring in of grain are done simultaneously. This process
continues tiIl the required height is attained. The top most ring of the rope is secured in position
by tying to the lower four rings. To provide a smooth surface, about 1 cm thick layer of mud
plaster is applied over the rope. A conical roof is placed on the top of the structure having an
ample overhang all around.
Bukhari type storage structure
Bukhari type storage structures are cylindrical in shape and are used for storage of
sorghum, wheat, padd)" Bengalgram, maize etc. Bukhari structures generally have capacities
between 3.5 to 18 tonnes, however, smaller capacity structures also exist. This may be made by
mud alone or by mud and bamboo. The cylindrical storage structures are raised above the ground
by wooden or masonry platform. The floor of the bin is made either by timber planks or by
bamboo splits, plastered over with mud mixed with dung and paddy straw. The walls of the
structure are made of timber or bamboo frame work and bamboo matting. Over the walls, mud-
85
straw plaster is applied on both sides. An overhanging cone type roof is provided on the
cylindrical structure. The roof is generally made of bamboo framework and straw.
In improved bukhari type structure, the basic shape remains the same but the material and
method of construction have been improved to make the structure more safe and durable. The
circular floor of structure is either made of wooden planks joined by lap joints or by a double
layer of bamboo splits closely set at right angles to each other. Over the floor, about 5 cm thick
mud plastering is provided. The walls of structure are made of two sets of strong bamboo
framework. The inter-space is filled with mud. The walls on both sides are plastered with mud.
The roof is conical and made of bamboo frame-work and covered with paddy straw or similar
other thatching material. The top of the conical roof is covered with 4 to 5 cm thick mud layer to
provide additional protection from rains. The structure is raised on timber or masonry pillars to a
height of about 1.5 m from ground level. Rat proofing cones are placed on all the four pillars to
avoid rats entering the storage structure.
Kothar type storage structure
These are used to store paddy, maize, sorghum, wheat etc. Their capacity varies between
9 to 35 ton. The storage structure is box like made of wood and raised on pillars. Both the floor
and walls are made of wooden planks whereas the thatched or tiled roof is placed over it to protect
the grains from the sun or rain. The improved Kothar structure is generally made of 5 cm thick
wooden planks and beams. The walls and floor are made in such a way that no gap exists between
the planks. The gabled roof on the top may be made of planks or corrugated metal sheets and
should be sufficiently overhang on all sides. The storage structure is raised on timber post to a
height of about 1.5 m above the ground. Rat proofing cones are provided on all posts to avoid
entry of rats in the structure.
Cylindrical Structure
86
Cylindrical bulk storage structures are being commonly used for storing different varieties
of grain. Depending upon the size the capacity may vary from 10 to 40 tones. This structure may
be used for storing 10 tons of grain at a time. The foundation is made of rain forced concrete. The
minimum height of the bottom edge of spout should be about 1.2 m above the ground level. The
entire structure rests on supporting the columns. There are two opening provided in the structure
for filling in the grain and taking it out. Top hole is made large enough to let a man enter for
cleaning purposes. The size of the out let is comparatively smaller. It is placed at a point where
the slope from all sides of the floor converges. It should have a hinged cap shutter with a locking
device. The roof on the top is provided with enough space on all the sides and it overhangs to the
extent of about 30cm.
Rectangular grain bin
On the farm where several grain crops are raised different grain bins are made under the
same shed to store all verities of grain separately. The size of the bin is determined on the basis of
expected average yield of the crop from the total area under the particular crop. The bin walls are
made 11.5 cm thick laid in cement morter of 1:3 ratio. The bin walls are kept 2.4m high near the
outer wall dropping down to 1.6m in front. The front wall is provided with a rectangular hole on
the floor level for taking out the grain. The hole can be closed or partially open from the inside of
the bin by a wooden board. The height of the bin wall is low so that the work man may drop the
head load of the grain directly in to the bins.
87
LECTURE 30 & 31
GODOWNS- TYPES, PROBLEMS
Design of Warehouses (Shed)
The following important points to be considered during design of godowns.
• The go downs side walls are of brick or stone masonary and sloped roofing in asbestos
or Corrugated Galvanized Iron (CGI) sheets over steel trusses.
• Generally a go down has a capacity of 5000 ton and consists of 3 compartments each
having a span of not less than 21·7 m with a clear height of 5·4 m.
• Air circulation is maintained through steel ventilators and air inlets of rolled steel
sections.
• Requirement of steel and cement is about 50 and 300 MT respectively.
• Bagged food grains are arranged in stacks with a base of 6 m x 9 m with a stack height
varying from 4 to 5 m, leaving 27 per cent free space of the floor area for alley ways
generally.
• It should be leave a free space of 2 m between the stacks and 0.8 to 1.0 m between wall
to stack for easily moving of person for observation.
• There should be 2.4 x 2.4 m size two large doors of opposite direction and top
Ventilators are used.
• Each door is provided with a light overhanging hood of 3.6 m long and 2.4 m wide.
• A ground ventilator having an opening of 30 x 30 cm is provided below each
• corresponding top ventilator. The top of ventilator is kept at height of 60 cm above the
floor level. It is also provided with iron rods, wire netting and shutter.
• The thickness of wall is kept minimum of 37.5 cm and maximum of 45 cm.
• The height of wall on which trusses are placed is generally kept about 5.5 m.
• The roof is either gabled or flat. The gable roof is covered with corrugated metal sheet
with maximum precautions taken to make it leak proof. However, flat roof is more
• durable as it is made of either reinforced brick or reinforced concrete of about 10 to 12.5
cm thickness.
• Wheat can be held in bags under dry climatic conditions for a period up to 2 years.
(This period is shortened to 8 to 12 months in humid conditions).
• Wheat can be kept in bulk any for 5 years.
A Problem regarding Design of Storage Structure
Design a bag storage structures for storing 250 ton. of Paddy. Assume reasonable data where ever
necessary.
Solution.
Design capacity of the storage structure = 250 T = 250,000 kg
Capacity of a bag of 100 x 60 x 30 cm = 75 kg. of Paddy
Hence, number of bags required for storage of 250 T paddy i.e. 250,000 kg. of paddy
=
= 3340 bags required for storage of 250 T paddy.
Bags are arranged in number of Stacks.
Let there be 10 bags in length and 10 bags in width in one stack.
So, No of bags/layer = 10 x 10 = 100
If there are 12 layers in a stack, total number of bags/stack
= 100 x 12 = 1200
88
Hence, the number of stacks required
= 2.78 ≈ 3 Stacks required for storage of 250 T of paddy
Space required by each stack
Length of stack l = 10 x 1.0 = 10.0 m
Width of stack w = 10 x 0.6 = 6.0 m
Height of stack h = 12 x 0.3 = 3.6 m
The clear distance between the walls and the end of stack = 0.8 m
The clear distance between the stacks i.e. between two stack = 2.0 m
Hence, the length of floor L is
L = (3 x 6.0) + (2 x 2.0) + (2 x 0.8)
= 23.6 m ≈ 24.0 m
The width of floor W is
W = (10 x 1.0) + (2 x 0.8)
= 11.6 m ≈ 12.0 m
Therefore, the overall dimensions of the go down may be taken as 24.0 m length, 12.0 m
width and the height of the walls may be kept as 5.0 m above the floor level.
The floor plan of the go down is shown in following Figure
89
LECTURE. NO. 32
STORAGE OF FODDER-TYPES OF SILOS
Fodder storage
Conserving the green fodder in the form of silage is one of the best options available to
ensure regular supply of quality fodder through different seasons of the year. Silage is the
conserved green fodder having moisture content in the range of 65 to 70 percent. Fodder crops
rich in soluble carbohydrates are incubated after chaffing for 45-50 days under anaerobic
conditions. Under proper storage conditions, silage can be stored up to two years; good quality
silage should not have any butyric acid, which gives off flavor to silage. If proper anaerobic
conditions are not maintained, silage produced would have butyric acid content in it. The fodder
crops such as maize, sorghum, oats, pearl millet, and hybrid napier rich in soluble carbohydrates
are most suitable for fodder ensiling. Quality of silage can be improved with the use of suitable
additives such as molasses, urea, salt, formic acid etc.,
Silo can be prepared by two methods
1. Tower silo
2. Horizontal Silo
Tower silo
Storage silos are cylindrical structures, typically 10 to 90 ft (3 to 27 m) in diameter and 30
to 275 ft (10 to 90 m) in height with the slip form larger diameter and taller silos. They can be
made of many materials. Wood staves, concrete staves, cast concrete, and steel panels have all
been used, and have varying cost, durability, and air tightness trade offs. Silos storing grain,
cement and woodchips are typically unloaded with air slides or augers. Silos can be unloaded into
rail cars, trucks or conveyors.
Tower silos containing silage are usually unloaded from the top of the pile, originally by
hand using a silage fork which has many more tines than the common pitchfork; In modern times
using mechanical un loaders. These are being used while Bottom silo unloaders were utilized at
times, which have problems with difficulty of repair.
Horizontal silos
In –ground storages are suitable for both long and short term storage of silage. Silage
being used in the short-term need only be sealed with plastic as for the bunker system. For long-
term storage, the plastic has to cover with a layer of soil. Regular monitoring is recommended to
ensure burrowing animals have not disturbed the soil layer, allowing air and water into the silage.
Pit Silo
Underground pits are dug into flat ground with the silage stored completely below ground
level or mounded. The soil removed from the hole should be mounded over the top of the pit to
shed water. If the stack shrinks below ground level then more soil should be added. They are
usually used for long term or drought storage and are only recommended for drier areas. Feeding
out from the pits should take place during dry weather. If the pits are open during wet weather
means raining season they will fill with water, making it impossible to remove the silage and
causing large losses. Underground pits should not be constructed in areas where a high water table
allows water to seep into the pit resulting losses of DM and quality.
Trench:
Trenches are usually comprise of the construction between pits and above the ground
walled bunkers, where the silage is stored partly below ground. The trench silo is a popular
method of storage particularly for producers making silage for the first time. A low –cost unlined
silo can be made with a tractor and blade. It can be built as temporary silo and lined at a later date.
They are quick to construct and repairs are limited to smoothing he walls and base.
90
References
1. Nakra, C. P. 1986. Farm Machinery and Equipment. Dhanpat Rai and Sons, New
Delhi.
2. Klenin, N.I., Popov, I.F., and Sakun, V. A. 1985. Agricultural Machines. Amerind
publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.
3. Jagdishwar Sahay. 2006. Elements of Agricultural Engineering. Standard
Publishers and Distributors, New Delhi.
4. Michal, A. M., and Ojha, T. P. 2008. Principles of Agricultural Engineering, Vol. I.
Jain Brothers, New Delhi.
5. Kepner, R. A., Roy Bainer, and Barger, B. L. 1978. Principles of farm machinery.
CBS publishers and Distributors, New Delhi.
6. Jain, S. C. 2003. Farm Machinery - An Approach. Standard Publishers and
Distributors, New Delhi.
7. Surendar Singh. 2007. Farm Machinery-Principles and Applications. Indian
Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi.
91
